# Bombing Muslims for Peace

![](astore-bombing-image.jpg){class="alarge"}

### Isn\'t It Time to Put Our Toy Soldiers Away (Along with Our Illusions)?

## By [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

Like many American boys of the baby-boomer generation, I played "war"
with those old, olive-drab, plastic toy soldiers meant to evoke our
great victory over the Nazis and "the Japs" during World War II. At age
10, I also kept a scrapbook of the 1973 Yom Kippur War between Israel
and its various Arab enemies in the Middle East. It was, I suppose, an
early sign that I would make both the military and the study of history
into careers.

I recall rooting for the Israelis, advertised then as crucial American
allies, against Egypt, Syria, and other regional enemies at least
ostensibly allied with the Soviet Union in that Cold War era. I bought
the prevailing narrative of a
[David-versus-Goliath](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/david-versus-goliath-in-the-middle-east)
struggle. I even got a book on the Yom Kippur War that captivated me by
displaying all the weaponry the U.S. military had rushed to Israel to
turn the tide there, including F-4 Phantom jets and M-60 main battle
tanks. (David's high-tech slingshots, if you will.) Little did I know
that, in the next 50 years of my life, I would witness increasingly
destructive U.S. military attacks in the Middle East, especially after
the oil cartel OPEC (largely Middle Eastern then) hit back hard with an
embargo in 1973 that sent our petroleum-based economy into a tailspin.

[]{#anchor}As one jokester quipped: Who put America's oil under the
sands of all those ungrateful Muslim countries in the Middle East? With
declarations like the [Carter
Doctrine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carter_Doctrine) in 1980, the
U.S. was obviously ready to show the world just how eagerly it would
defend its "vital interests" (meaning fossil fuels, of course) in that
region. And even today, as we watch the latest round in this country's
painfully consistent record of attempting to pound various countries and
entities there into submission, mainly via repetitive air strikes, we
should never forget the [importance of
oil](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/why-we-fight-oil_b_1824765), and
lots of it, to keep the engines of industry and war churning along in a
devastating fashion.

Right now, of course, the world is witnessing yet another U.S. [bombing
campaign](https://news.antiwar.com/2024/02/04/us-uk-launch-another-round-of-heavy-strikes-on-yemen/),
the latest in a series that seems all too predictable ([and
futile](https://theintercept.com/2024/01/18/biden-yemen-houthi-airstrikes/)),
meant to teach the restless rebels of Iraq, Syria, Yemen, and possibly
even Iran a lesson when it comes to messing with the United States of
America. As the recently deceased country singer [Toby
Keith](https://www.bostonglobe.com/2024/02/06/nation/beer-my-horses-singer-songwriter-toby-keith-has-died-after-battling-stomach-cancer/)
put it: Mess with this country and "We'll [put a
boot](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c9r0haVPDAo) (think: bomb) in your
ass." You kill [three
soldiers](https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3659809/3-us-service-members-killed-others-injured-in-jordan-following-drone-attack/)
of ours and we'll kill scores, if not hundreds, if not thousands of
yours (and it doesn't really matter if they're soldiers or not),
because... well, because we damn well can!

America's leaders, possessing a peerless Air Force, regularly exhibit a
[visceral
willingness](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-the-dark-side-of-air-power/)
to use it to bomb and missile perceived enemies into submission or, if
need be, nothingness. And don't for a second think that they're going to
be stopped by international law, humanitarian concerns, well-meaning
protesters, or indeed any force on this planet. America bombs because it
can, because it believes in the [efficacy of
violence](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/bread-and-circuses-in-rom_b_3414248),
and because it's run by appeasers.

Yes, America's presidents, its bombers-in-chief, are indeed appeasers.
Of course, they think they're being strong when they're blowing distant
people to bits, but their actions invariably showcase a distinctive kind
of weakness. They eternally seek to appease the
[military-industrial-congressional
](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/dwight-eisenhower-memorial_b_1270232)[complex](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/dwight-eisenhower-memorial_b_1270232),
aka the national (in)security state, a complex state-within-a-state with
an unappeasable hunger for power, profit, and ever more destruction.
They fail and fail and fail again in the Middle East, yet they're
incapable of not ordering more bombing, [more
droning](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-predatory-dreams/), more
killing there. Think of them as being possessed by a monomania for war
akin to my urge to play with toy soldiers. The key difference? When I
played at war, I was a wet-behind-the-ears 10 year old.

**The Rockets' Red Glare, the Bombs Bursting in Air**

No technology may be more all-American than bombs and bombers and no
military doctrine more American than the urge to attain "peace" through
[massive
firepower](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-predatory-dreams/). In
World War II and subsequent wars, the essential U.S. approach could be
summarized in five words: mass production enabling mass destruction.

No other country in the world has dedicated such vast resources as mine
has to mass destruction through air power. Think of the full-scale
bombing of cities in Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan in World War II,
ending in the atomic destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Think of the
flattening of North Korea during the Korean War of the early 1950s or
the staggering bombing campaigns in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia in the
1960s and early 1970s. Or consider the massive use of air power in
Desert Shield against Iraq in the early 1990s followed by the air
campaigns that accompanied the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq in 2003
(and never quite seemed to stop thereafter). The butcher's bill for such
bombing has indeed been high, quite literally millions of non-combatants
killed by America's self-styled "arsenal of democracy."

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

And indeed, as you read this, another country is now faithfully
following America's example. Israel is systematically destroying Gaza,
rendering it essentially uninhabitable for those Palestinians who
survive the ongoing rampage. In fact, early in its war of annihilation,
Israeli leaders
[cited](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/12/23/israel-gaza-war-wwii-palestine)
the Allied destruction of the German city of Dresden in 1945 in support
of their own atrocious air and ground campaign against the Palestinians.

Looking at this dispassionately as a military historian, the Dresden
reference makes a certain twisted sense. In World War II, the Americans
and their British allies in their "combined bomber offensive" destroyed
German cities indiscriminately, seeing all Germans as essentially Nazis,
complicit in the crimes of their government, and so legitimate targets.
Something similar is true of the right-wing Israeli government today. It
sees all Palestinians as essentially members of Hamas and thus complicit
in last year's brutal October 7th attacks on Israel, making them
legitimate targets of war, Israeli- (and American-) style. Just like the
United States, Israel claims to be "defending democracy" whatever it
does. Little wonder, then, that Washington has been so willing to send
bombs and bullets to its protégé as it seeks "peace" through massive
firepower and genocidal destruction.

Indeed, of late, there has been considerable debate about whether Israel
is engaged in acts of genocide, with the International Court of Justice
ruling that the present government should strive to prevent just such
acts in Gaza. Putting that issue aside, it's undeniable that Israel has
been using [indiscriminate
bombing](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/biden-takes-a-tougher-stance-on-israels-indiscriminate-bombing-of-gaza)
attacks and a devastating invasion in a near-total war against
Palestinians living on that 25-mile-long strip of land, an approach that
calls to mind the harrowing catchphrase "Exterminate all the brutes!"
from Joseph Conrad's novel *Heart of Darkness*.

In a sense, there's nothing new under the sun. Certainly, the Old
Testament itself provides examples of exterminatory campaigns ([cited by
Bibi
Netanyahu](https://www.financial-world.org/news/news/financial/22857/netanyahu-openly-calls-for-genocide-citing-the-bible-go-attack-the-amalekites-/)
as Israel first moved against the Palestinians in Gaza). He might as
well have cited a catchphrase heard during America's war in Vietnam, but
rooted in the medieval
[crusades](https://www.thisdayinquotes.com/2019/07/kill-them-all-and-let-god-sort-them-out/):
"Kill them all and let God sort them out."

**America's Unrelenting Crusade in the Middle East**

In the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, President George W. Bush
got into trouble almost instantly when he referred to the "war on
terror" he had launched as a
"[crusade](https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1001020294332922160)." Yet, as
impolitic as that word might have seemed, how better to explain U.S.
actions in the Middle East and Afghanistan? Just consider our faith in
the goodness and efficacy of "our" military and that all-American urge
to bring "democracy" to the world, despite the destruction visited upon
Iraq, Libya, Syria, and Yemen over the last several decades. Or go back
to 1953 and the role the CIA played in the
[overthrow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1953_Iranian_coup_d%27état) of
Iran's legitimate democratic ruler and his replacement by the brutally
repressive regime of the Shah.

Try to imagine such events from the perspective of a historian writing
in the year 2200. Might that future scribe not refer to repeated U.S.
invasions of, incursions into, and bombing campaigns across the Middle
East as a bloody crusade, launched under the (false) banner of democracy
with righteous vengeance, if not godly purpose, in mind? Might that
historian not suggest that such a "crusade" was ultimately more about
power and profit, domination and control than (as advertised) "freedom"?
And might that historian not be impressed (if not depressed) by the
remarkable way the U.S. brought seemingly unending chaos and death to
the region over such a broad span of time?

Consider these facts. More than 22 years after the 9/11 attacks, the
U.S. still has at least [30,000
troops](https://www.npr.org/2024/02/05/1229295276/recent-violence-raises-questions-about-why-u-s-has-so-many-troops-in-the-middle-)
scattered across the Middle East. At least one Navy carrier strike
group, and [often
two](https://www.nbcnews.com/now/video/-u-s-deploys-second-navy-carrier-strike-group-to-middle-east-195722821789),
dominate the regional waters, while striking numbers of military bases
("Little Americas") are still [sprinkled
across](https://www.americansecurityproject.org/national-security-strategy/u-s-bases-in-the-middle-east/)
countries ranging from Kuwait to Bahrain, from Qatar to the United Arab
Emirates and beyond. So many years later, about [900 U.S.
troops](https://www.voanews.com/a/us-troops-in-middle-east-what-are-they-doing-and-where-/7469452.html)
still illegally occupy part of Syria (not coincidentally, where that
country produces most of its oil) and [2,500
more](https://www.usnews.com/news/world/articles/2024-01-30/explainer-what-are-us-troops-doing-in-the-middle-east-and-where-are-they)
remain in Iraq, even though the government there would like them to
depart.

**Yankee Go Home? Apparently Not in My Lifetime**

Meanwhile, American military aid, mostly in the form of [deadly
weaponry](https://stephensemler.substack.com/p/us-arms-exports-hit-a-record-high),
flows not only to Israel but to other countries in the region like Egypt
and Jordan. Direct [U.S. military
support](https://www.airforcetimes.com/news/your-air-force/2022/04/08/us-awaits-final-17-million-repayment-from-saudis-for-air-refueling-in-yemen-war/)
facilitated Saudi Arabia's long, destructive, and unsuccessful war
against the Houthis in Yemen, a conflict Washington is now conducting on
its own with repeated air strikes. And of course, the entire region has,
for more than two decades now, been under constant U.S. military
pressure in that war on terror, which all too quickly became a war of
terror (and [of
torture](http://www.niemanwatchdog.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=ask_this.view&askthisid=00386)).

Recall that the U.S. [invasion of
Iraq](https://ronpaulinstitute.org/silencing-war-criticism-the-iraq-invasion-of-2003/)
in 2003 led to the death of [roughly a
million](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casualties_of_the_Iraq_War)
[Iraqis](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/IndirectDeaths)
and the displacement of [millions
more](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2021/Costs%20of%20War_Vine%20et%20al_Displacement%20Update%20August%202021.pdf)
as refugees. How could that not be considered part of a "crusade," even
if a fitful and failing one? Yet, here's the rub: just as those Catholic
crusades of the Middle Ages weren't entirely or even primarily about
religion, so today's American version isn't motivated primarily by an
anti-Muslim animus. Of course, there is indeed an inescapably religious
aspect to such never-ending American war-making, but what drives those
wars is largely naked greed, vengeance, and an all-American urge both to
appease and amplify the [military-industrial-congressional
complex](https://tomdispatch.com/a-highway-to-peace-or-a-highway-to-hell/).

Of course, as was true in the years after 9/11 and is still true today,
Americans are generally encouraged to see their country's imperial and
crusading acts as purely defensive in nature, the righteous responses of
freedom-bringers. Admittedly, it's a strange kind of freedom this
country brings at the tip of a sword --- or on the nosecone of a
Hellfire missile. Even so, in such an otherwise thoroughly contentious
Congress, it should be striking [how few
members](https://issuechronicle.substack.com/p/as-the-president-continues-to-bomb)
have challenged the latest bombing version of this country's enduring
war in the Middle East.

Forget the Constitution. No Congressional declaration of war is believed
necessary for any of this, nor has it mattered much (so far) that the
American public has grown increasingly skeptical of those wars and the
acts of destruction that go with them. As it happens, however, the
crusade, such as it is, has proven remarkably sustainable without much
public crusading zeal. For most Americans, those acts remain distinctly
off-stage and largely out of mind, except at moments like the present
one where the deaths of three American soldiers give the administration
all the excuse it needs for repetitive acts of retaliation.

No, we the people exercise remarkably little control over the war-making
that the [military-industrial-congressional
complex](https://tomdispatch.com/can-the-military-industrial-complex-be-tamed/)
has engaged in for decades or the costs that go with them. Indeed, the
dollar costs are largely deferred to future generations as America's
national debt climbs even faster than the Pentagon war budget.

America, so we were told by President George W. Bush, is hated for its
freedoms.  Yet the "freedoms" we're allegedly hated for aren't those
delineated in the Constitution and its Bill of Rights.  Rather, it's
America's "freedom" to build military bases across the globe and bomb
everywhere, a "freedom" to sell such bellicose activity as lawful and
even admirable, a "freedom" to engage in a hyperviolent style of play,
treating "our" troops and so many foreigners as toy soldiers and
expendable props for Washington's games.  

It's something I captured unintentionally five decades ago with those
toy soldiers of mine from an imagined glorious military past.  But after
a time (too long, perhaps) I learned to recognize them as the childish
things they were and put them away.  They're now long gone, lost to time
and maturity, as is the illusion that my country pursues freedom and
democracy in the Middle East through ceaseless acts of extreme violence,
which just seem to** **[drone
on](https://twitter.com/CENTCOM/status/1755339541173723294) and
[on](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assassination_of_Qasem_Soleimani) and
[on](https://thehill.com/policy/international/4447258-graham-biden-middle-east-strikes-iranian-killed/).

Copyright 2024 William J. Astore

Featured image: [On
Prowl](https://flickr.com/photos/ztij0/706653813/in/photolist-6oh7NC-7JqfDX-4Kis7z-FNKnm-81rqea-axJUeP-C6Bb-25rMyr-4SeobK-6QKmfH-2ogRZd4-2kXK5Nw-3hkz8A-5Rw7z5-4fyUkM-LCrSX-25rN48-5vXFD7-25rMhT-25rMP4-7GTV-p9ptCT-8UWaSW-25rLDr-7GXU-6QaVR7-9cCziF-2kAG2KS-2ow9XiQ-bug11a-61TpKX-4PKD1k-qnHpkv-9bVH3n-CDir4P-DtMU2F-ffLXuA-6wUeEF-aYUHc-VY9SSX-7nmMAP-Fxc8Uc-5fNuUr-dRDL1Q-rNNVQ-2dABpoR-CoEDWF)
by [Jithesh](https://flickr.com/photos/ztij0/) is licensed under [CC
BY-SA 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/) / Flickr

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly *Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

**William J. Astore**, a retired lieutenant colonel (USAF) and
professor of history, is
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/are-the-best-years-of-my-country-behind-me/)[ regular ](https://tomdispatch.com/are-the-best-years-of-my-country-behind-me/)and
a senior fellow at the Eisenhower Media Network (EMN), an organization
of critical veteran military and national security professionals. His
personal substack is [*Bracing Views*](https://bracingviews.com/). His
video testimony for the Merchants of Death Tribunal is available [at
this
link](https://rumble.com/v4cruwx-the-military-industrial-complex-lt.-col.-william-astore.html).

Thanks to "[TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)" where this article originally appeared, without the title image.
