 # Three Versions of Judas\*

![](judas.jpg){class="a"}

## Jorge Luis Borges


There seemed a certainty in degradation.\
- T. E. Lawrence, Seven Pillars of Wisdom

**In** Asia Minor or in Alexandria, in the second century of our faith
(when Basilides was announcing that the cosmos was a rash and
malevolent improvisation engineered by defective angels), Nils
Runeberg might have directed, with a singular intellectual passion,
one of the Gnostic monasteries. Dante would have destined him,
perhaps, for a fiery sepulcher; his name might have augmented the
catalogues of heresiarchs, between Satornibus and Carpocrates; some
fragment of his preaching, embellished with invective, might have been
preserved in the apocryphal *Liber adversus omnes haereses* or might
have perished when the firing of a monastic library consumed the last
example of the *Syntagma*. Instead, God assigned him to the twentieth
century, and to the university city of Lund. There, in 1904, he
published the first edition of *Kristus och Judas*; there, in 1909,
his masterpiece *Dem hemlige Frälsaren* appeared. (Of this last
mentioned work there exists a German version, *Der heimliche Heiland*,
published in 1912 by Emil Schering.)

Before undertaking an examination of the foregoing works, it is
necessary to repeat that Nils Runeberg, a member of the National
Evangelical Union, was deeply religious. In some salon in Paris, or
even in Buenos Aires, a literary person might well rediscover
Runeberg's theses; but these arguments, presented in such a setting,
would seem like frivolous and idle exercises in irrelevance or
blasphemy. To Runeberg they were the key with which to decipher a
central mystery of theology; they were a matter of meditation and
analysis, of historic and philologic controversy, of loftiness, of
jubilation, and of terror. They justified, and destroyed, his life.
Whoever peruses this essay should know that it states only Runeberg's
conclusions, not his dialectic or his proof. Someone may observe that
no doubt the conclusion preceded the "proofs". For who gives himself
up to looking for proofs of something he does not believe in or the
predication of which he does not care about?

The first edition of *Kristus och Judas* bears the following
categorical epigraph, whose meaning, some years later, Nils Runeberg
himself would monstrously dilate:

**Not one thing, but everything tradition attributes to Judas Iscariot
is false.**

(De Quincey, 1857.)

Preceded in his speculation by some German thinker, De Quincey opined
that Judas had betrayed Jesus Christ in order to force him to declare
his divinity and thus set off a vast rebellion against the yoke of
Rome; Runeberg offers a metaphysical vindication. Skillfully, he
begins by pointing out how superfluous was the act of Judas. He
observes (as did Robertson) that in order to identify a master who
daily preached in the synagogue and who performed miracles before
gatherings of thousands, the treachery of an apostle is not necessary.
This, nevertheless, occurred. To suppose an error in Scripture is
intolerable; no less intolerable is it to admit that there was a
single haphazard act in the most precious drama in the history of the
world. Ergo, the treachery of Judas was not accidental; it was a
predestined deed which has its mysterious place in the economy of the
Redemption. Runeberg continues: The Word, when It was made flesh,
passed from ubiquity into space, from eternity into history, from
blessedness without limit to mutation and death; in order to
correspond to such a sacrifice it was necessary that a man, as
representative of all men, make a suitable sacrifice. Judas Iscariot
was that man. Judas, alone among the apostles, intuited the secret
divinity and the terrible purpose of Jesus. The Word had lowered
Himself to be mortal; Judas, the disciple of the Word, could lower
himself to the role of informer (the worst transgression dishonor
abides), and welcome the fire which can not be extinguished. The lower
order is a mirror of the superior order, the forms of the earth
correspond to the forms of the heavens; the stains on the skin are a
map of the incorruptible constellations; Judas in some way reflects
Jesus. Thus the thirty pieces of silver and the kiss; thus deliberate
self-destruction, in order to deserve damnation all the more. In this
manner did Nils Runeberg elucidate the enigma of Judas.

The theologians of all the confessions refuted him. Lars Peter
Engström accused him of ignoring, or of confining to the past, the
hypostatic union of the Divine Trinity; Axel Borelius charged him with
renewing the heresy of the Docetists, who denied the humanity of
Jesus; the sharp tongued bishop of Lund denounced him for
contradicting the third verse of chapter twenty-two of the Gospel of
St.

Luke.

 

These various anathemas influenced Runeberg, who partially rewrote the
disapproved book and modified his doctrine. He abandoned the terrain
of theology to his adversaries and postulated oblique arguments of a
moral order. He admitted that Jesus, "who could count on the
considerable resources which Omnipotence offers," did not need to make
use of a man to redeem all men. Later, he refuted those who affirm
that we know nothing of the inexplicable traitor; we know, he said,
that he was one of the apostles, one of those chosen to announce the
Kingdom of Heaven, to cure the sick, to cleanse the leprous, to
resurrect the dead, and to cast out demons (Matthew 10:7-8; Luke 9:1).
A man whom the Redeemer has thus distinguished deserves from us the
best interpretations of his deeds. To impute his crime to cupidity (as
some have done, citing John 12:6) is to resign oneself to the most
torpid motive force. Nils Runeberg proposes an opposite moving force:
an extravagant and even limitless asceticism. The ascetic, for the
greater glory of God, degrades and mortifies the flesh; Judas did the
same with the spirit. He renounced honor, good, peace, the Kingdom of
Heaven, as others, less heroically, renounced pleasure.[^1] With
a terrible lucidity he premeditated his offense.

 

In adultery, there is usually tenderness and self-sacrifice; in
murder, courage; in profanation and blasphemy, a certain satanic
splendor. Judas elected those offenses unvisited by any virtues: abuse
of confidence (John 12 :6) and informing. He labored with gigantic
humility; he thought himself unworthy to be good. Paul has written:
*Whoever glorifieth himself, let him glorify himself in the Lord*. (I
Corinthians 1:31); Judas sought Hell because the felicity of the Lord
sufficed him. He thought that happiness, like good, is a divine
attribute and not to be usurped by men.[^2]

Many have discovered post factum that in the justifiable beginnings of
Runeberg lies his extravagant end and that Dem hemlige Frälsaren is a
mere perversion or exacerbation of Kristus och Judas. Toward the end
of 1907, Runeberg finished and revised the manuscript text; almost two
years passed without his handing it to the printer. In October of
1909, the book appeared with a prologue (tepid to the point of being
enigmatic) by the Danish Hebraist Erik Erfjord and bearing this
perfidious epigraph: *In the world he was, and the world was made by
him, and the world knew him not* (John 1:10). The general argument is
not complex, even if the conclusion is monstrous. God, argues Nils
Runeberg, lowered himself to be a man for the redemption of the human
race; it is reasonable to assume that thesacrifice offered by him was
perfect, not invalidated or attenuated by any omission. To limit all
that happened to the agony of one afternoon on the cross is
blasphemous. [^3] To affirm that he was a man and that he was
incapable of sin contains a contradiction; the attributes of
*impeccabilitas* and of *humanitas* are not compatible. Kemnitz admits
that the Redeemer could feel fatigue, cold, confusion, hunger and
thirst; it is reasonable to admit that he could also sin and be
damned. The famous text "He will sprout like a root in a dry soil;
there is not good mien to him, nor beauty; despised of men and the
least of them; a man of sorrow, and experienced in heartbreaks"
(Isaiah 53:2-3) is for many people a forecast of the Crucified in the
hour of his death; for some (as for instance, Hans Lassen Martensen),
it is a refutation of the beauty which the vulgar consensus attributes
to Christ; for Runeberg, it is a precise prophecy, not of one moment,
but of all the atrocious future, in time and eternity, of the Word
made flesh. God became a man completely, a man to the point of infamy,
a man to the point of being reprehensible - all the way to the abyss.
In order to save us, He could have chosen any of the destinies which
together weave the uncertain web of history; He could have been
Alexander, or Pythagoras, or Rurik, or Jesus; He chose an infamous
destiny: He was Judas.

In vain did the bookstores of Stockholm and Lund offer this
revelation. The incredulous considered it, a priori, an insipid and
laborious theological game; the theologians disdained it. Runeberg
intuited from this universal indifference an almost miraculous
confirmation. God had commanded this indifference; God did not wish
His terrible secret propagated in the world. Runeberg understood that
the hour had not yet come. He sensed ancient and divine curses
converging upon him, he remembered Elijah and Moses, who covered their
faces on the mountain top so as not to see God; he remembered Isaiah,
who prostrated himself when his eyes saw That One whose glory fills
the earth; Saul who was blinded on the road to Damascus; the rabbi
Simon ben Azai, who saw Paradise and died; the famous soothsayer John
of Viterbo, who went mad when he was able to see the Trinity; the
Midrashim, abominating the impious who pronounce the Shem Hamephorash,
the secret name of God. Wasn't he, perchance, guilty of this dark
crime? Might not this be the blasphemy against the Spirit, the sin
which will not be pardoned (Matthew 12:3)? Valerius Soranus died for
having revealed the occult name of Rome; what infinite punishment
would be his for having discovered and divulged the terrible name of
God?
 
Intoxicated with insomnia and with vertiginous dialectic, Nils
Runeberg wandered through the streets of Malmö, praying aloud that he
be given the grace to share Hell with the Redeemer.


He died of the rupture of an aneurysm, the first day of March 1912.
The writers on heresy, the heresiologists, will no doubt remember him;
he added to the concept of the Son, which seemed exhausted, the
complexities of calamity and evil.
 

[^1]: Borelius mockingly interrogates: Why did he not renounce
to renounce? Why not renounce renouncing?

[^2]: Euclydes da Cunha, in a book ignored by Runeberg, notes
that for the heresiarch of Canudos, Antonio Conselheiro, virtue was "a
kind of impiety almost." An Argentine reader could recall analogous
passages in the work of Almafuerte. Runeberg published, in the
symbolist sheet Sju insegel, an assiduously descriptive poem, "The
Secret Water": the first stanzas narrate the events of one tumultuous
day; the last, the finding of a glacial pool; the poet suggests that
the eternalness of this silent water checks our useless violence, and
in some way allows and absolves it. The poem concludes in this way\
The water of the forest is still and felicitous,\
And we, we can be vicious and full of pain.
 
[^3]: Maurice Abramowicz observes: "Jesus, d'apres ce
scandinave, a toujours le beau role; ses deboires, grace a la science
des typographes, jouissent d'une reputation polyglotte; sa residence
de trente-trois ans parmis les humains ne fut, en somne, qu'une
villegiature." Erfjord, in the third appendix to the
Christelige Dogmatik, refutes this passage. He writes that the
crucifying of God has not ceased, for anything which has happened once
in time is repeated ceaselessly through all eternity. Judas, now,
continues to receive the pieces of silver; he continues to hurl the
pieces of silver in the temple; he continues to knot the hangman's
noose on the field of blood. (Erfjord, to justify this affirmation,
invokes the last chapter of the first volume of the Vindication of
Eternity, by Jaromir Hladlk.)

Translator unknown.  
  
\* From: "Artificios" (1944). In the introduction, Borges writes:
"Schopenhauer, De Quincey, Mauthner, Shaw, Chesterton, León Bloy, form
the heterogenic census of the authors I continually re-read. In the
christological fantasy titled "Three Versions of Judas" I think I
perceive the remote influence of the last \[Bloy\]."

[Español](borges-judas-sp.html)

