# Anthroposophical Guidelines

![](guidelines-image.jpg){class="a"}

## by Rudolf Steiner

### 13 through 28

Translated by Frank Thomas Smith

13. By means of meditation, one can find the I that emerges in ordinary
consciousness in three additional forms: 1. In the consciousness which
perceives the etheric body the I appears as an image - which at the same
time is an active being and as such imparts shape, growth and formative
forces to man. 2. In the consciousness which perceives the astral body,
the I is manifested as a member of a spiritual world from which it
derives its forces. 3. In the consciousness just described  as the last
to be achieved, the I reveals itself as an autonomous being, relatively
independent of its spiritual environment.  

14. The second form of the I, which was indicated in the thirteenth
Guideline, emerges as an "image", or picture. By becoming aware of this
image-nature, light is also thrown on the essence of thinking in which
the I appears in normal consciousness. One seeks the "true I" by all
kinds of reflections. But a serious insight into the experiences of this
consciousness shows that one does not find the "true I" therein. What
appears is rather a reflection in thought, one which is less than an
image. One realizes the truth of this fact when one progresses to the I
as an image that lives in the etheric body. And by this means one is
finally urged correctly to *seek* the I as the true being of man. 

15. The insight into the form in which the I lives in the astral body
leads to a correct feeling for the relations between man and the
spiritual world. This I-form is submerged in the dark depths of the
unconscious for normal experience. In these depths man connects with the
spiritual cosmic being through inspiration. Only an extremely weak
feeling-like reflection of this inspiration, which resides in the depths
of the soul and derives from the distant breadth of the spiritual world,
is accessible to normal consciousness.

16. The third form of the I gives insight into the autonomous being of
man within a spiritual world. It stimulates the feeling that the human
being's visible earthly-material nature is only the physical
manifestation of what he is in reality. Thus the starting point for true
self-knowledge is given. For the self which shapes man in his reality is
only revealed to knowledge when he advances from the thought of the I to
its image, from the image to the image's creative force, and from there
to the spiritual bearers of these forces.

17. Man is a being whose life evolves in the middle of two world
regions. \[Most likely, "three" worlds is meant. Trans.\] In the
development of his physical body he is integrated in a "lower world";
with his soul he forms a "middle world", and he strives towards a
"higher world" through his spiritual forces. He develops his physical
body with what nature has given him; he bears his soul-being as his own
contribution; he finds the spiritual forces in himself as the gifts
which lead him beyond himself towards participation in a divine world.

18. The spirit is creative in these three worlds. Nature is not
spiritless. One also loses knowledge of nature if one is not aware of
the spirit in it. Nevertheless, one will find the spirit in nature as
though sleeping. Just as sleep has its function in human life and the I
must sleep for certain periods in order to be fully awake at others, so
must the cosmic spirit sleep in "nature's realm" in order to be fully
awake in another.

19. In respect to the cosmos, man\'s soul is dreaming if he doesn't pay
attention to the spirit which works in him. This spirit awakens the
soul-dreams, which play out in his inner life, to participation in the
cosmos from which man's true being originates. Just as the dreamer shuts
himself off from the physical environment and closes himself in his own
being, so his soul must lose its connection to the World-Spirit from
which it originates if he refuses to hear the wake-up call of the spirit
within.

20. The correct development of man's soul-life requires that he be
fully conscious of the spirit's actions within him. Many adherents of
the modern scientific worldview are so caught up in their prejudices
that they consider general causality to be dominant in all the world's
phenomena -- and if man thinks that he can be the cause of something it
is an illusion. Modern science wishes to follow observation and
experience with the best of intentions. But due to the prejudice about
the hidden causality of human motivation it sins against this principle.
A free act deriving from the inner human essence is an elementary result
of self-observation. It must not be denied, but be brought into harmony
with insight into the general causality in natural law.

21. Non-recognition of this motivation from the spiritual core of the
human being is the greatest hindrance to attainment of insight into the
spiritual world. For the inclusion of one's own being in the natural
scheme of things diverts attention from this being. One cannot penetrate
into the spiritual world unless one grasps the spirit where it is
directly revealed: in objective self-observation.

22. Self-observation establishes the beginning of spirit-observation.
And it can establish the correct beginning because through correct
reflection one cannot stop short at it, but must advance to further
spiritual cosmic substance. Just as the human body atrophies when it
does not receive physical nourishment, so does the correctly
self-observing person feel his Self atrophying if he doesn't see how the
forces of an active spiritual world outside him are working into it.

23. The human being enters into the spiritual world when he passes
through the portal of death and feels all that he has acquired through
the bodily senses and brain in impressions and mental content during
earthly life fall away. In a comprehensive tableau he is then conscious
of images of his life on earth which were retained in memory in the form
of image-less thoughts; or what was unnoticed during earthly life, but
which made an unconscious impression on the soul. These images grow
faint after a few days until they disappear. When they are completely
gone, he knows that he has also laid aside his etheric body, which he
recognizes as the bearer of these images. 

24. After the etheric body has been laid aside, man's astral body and
his I remain. As long as the former is still with him, it allows
consciousness to experience all the unconscious contents formed when
sleeping during earthly life. The judgments which the spiritual beings
of a higher world instilled in the astral body during sleep are
contained in these contents which, however, are hidden from earthly
consciousness. The person re-lives his earthly life - in such a way,
however, that the assessment of his soul-content, of his deeds and
thoughts, is determined from the viewpoint of the spirit-world. He
experiences his life in reverse: first the last night, then the next to
last, and so on.

25. The judging of a person's life, which is experienced in the astral
body after passing through the portal of death, lasts as long as the
time which passed in sleep during earthly life. 

26. Only after the astral body has been laid aside, after the
completion of the life judgment, does man enter into the spiritual
world. Therein he stands in relation to the purely spiritual beings as
he did on earth to the beings and processes of nature. In spiritual
experiences, everything which was exterior to him becomes interior. He
doesn't merely perceive the outer world, but he experiences it in its
spirituality - which was hidden from him on earth - as his inner world.

27. Man, as he is on the earth, becomes outer-world in the
spirit-realm. One looks \[from there\] at the human being as one looks
at the stars, clouds, mountains, rivers from the earth. And *this *outer
world is no less rich in content than is the appearance of the cosmos
when viewed from the earth. 

28. The *forces* created by man's spirit in the spiritual realm
continue to be active in the formation of the earthly man, just as the
*deeds* carried out in physical life continue to be active as
soul-content in life after death.

To be continued...

[Guidelines 5 through 12](https://southerncrossreview.org/155/guidelines-5-12.html)
