# The Military-Industrial Complex Is the Winner (Not You)

![](war-is-hell.jpeg){class="a"}

## by [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

2023 was a year marked by devastating conflicts from Russia's [ongoing
invasion](https://www.cnbc.com/2024/01/02/ukraine-war-live-updates-latest-news-on-russia-and-the-war-in-ukraine.html)
of Ukraine to Hamas's horrific [terror
attacks](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/11/12/world/middleeast/israel-death-toll-hamas-attack.html)
on Israel, from that country's indiscriminate [mass
slaughter](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/dec/30/gaza-death-toll-israelis-idf-refugee-camps-famine-lebanon-border-gaza-war)
in Gaza to a devastating [civil
war](https://www.justsecurity.org/90517/the-imminent-risk-of-genocide-in-darfur-never-again-cannot-become-a-relic-of-the-past/)
in Sudan. And there's a distinct risk of even worse to come this
year. Still, there was one clear winner in this avalanche of violence,
suffering, and war: the U.S. military-industrial complex.

In December, President Biden signed a record authorization of [\$886
billion](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/congress-passes-886-billion-defense-policy-bill-biden-sign-into-law-2023-12-14/)
in "national defense" spending for 2024, including funds for the
Pentagon proper and work on nuclear weapons at the Department of Energy.
Add to that tens of billions of dollars more in likely emergency
military aid for Ukraine and Israel, and such spending could well top
\$900 billion for the first time this year.

Meanwhile, the administration's
[\$100-billion-plus](https://apnews.com/article/biden-ukraine-congress-aid-military-russia-002fde812843fc1fc0e969b653ce83a8)
emergency military aid package that failed to pass Congress last month
is likely to slip by in some form this year, while the House and Senate
are almost guaranteed to add [tens of
billions](https://quincyinst.org/report/more-money-less-security-pentagon-spending-and-strategy-in-the-biden-administration/)
more for "national defense" projects in specific states and districts,
as happened in two of the last three years.

Of course, before the money actually starts flowing, Congress needs to
pass an appropriations bill for Fiscal Year 2024, clearing the way for
that money to be spent. As of this writing, the House and Senate had
indeed [agreed
to](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2024/01/07/congress-budget-deal/)
a tentative deal to sign onto the \$886 billion that was authorized in
December. A trillion-dollar version of such funding could be just around
the corner.  (If past practice is any guide, [more than
half](https://jacobin.com/2022/12/fiscal-year-2023-biden-defense-budget-stimulus-checks)
of that sum could go directly to corporations, large and small.)

A trillion dollars is a hard figure to process. In the 1960s, when the
federal budget was a fraction of what it is now, Republican Senator
Everett Dirksen [allegedly](https://www.azquotes.com/quote/79144) said,
"A billion here, a billion there, and pretty soon you're talking real
money." Whether he did [or
not](https://dirksencenter.org/research-collections/everett-m-dirksen/dirksen-record/billion-here-billion-there),
that quote neatly captures how congressional attitudes toward federal
spending have changed. After all, today, a billion dollars is less than
a rounding error at the Pentagon. The [department's
budget](https://quincyinst.org/report/more-money-less-security-pentagon-spending-and-strategy-in-the-biden-administration/)
is now hundreds of billions of dollars more than at the height of the
Vietnam War and over twice what it was when President Eisenhower warned
of the "[unwarranted
influence](https://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/eisenhower001.asp)"
wielded by what he called "the military-industrial complex."

To offer just a few comparisons: annual spending on the costly,
dysfunctional [F-35 combat
aircraft](https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/FY2024/FY2024_Weapons.pdf)
alone is greater than the entire budget of the [Centers for Disease
Control and
Prevention](https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2023/s0309-budget.html). In
2020, Lockheed Martin's contracts with the Pentagon were worth [more
than](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2021/Profits%20of%20War_Hartung_Costs%20of%20War_Sept%2013%2C%202021.pdf)
the budgets of the State Department *and* the Agency for International
Development combined, and its arms-related
[revenues](https://people.defensenews.com/top-100/) continue to rival
the government's entire investment in diplomacy. One [\$13
billion](https://www.cnet.com/pictures/meet-the-navys-new-13-billion-aircraft-carrier/)
aircraft carrier costs more than the annual
[budget](https://www.epa.gov/planandbudget/budget) of the Environmental
Protection Agency. Overall, more than
[half](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/blog/2023/05/31/parity-schmarity-military-big-winner-fy-2024-budget-deal/)
of the discretionary budget Congress approves every year --- basically
everything the federal government spends other than on mandatory
programs like Medicare and Social Security --- goes to the Pentagon.

It would, I suppose, be one thing if such huge expenditures were truly
needed to protect the country or make the world a safer place. However,
they have more to do with pork-barrel politics and a misguided "cover
the globe" military strategy than a careful consideration of what might
be needed for actual "defense."

**Congressional Follies**

The road to an \$886-billion military budget authorization began early
last year with a
[debt-ceiling](https://apnews.com/article/debt-limit-deal-biden-mccarthy-default-01657c829be119850cd65ab9ffb0626a)
deal negotiated by President Biden and then-House Speaker Kevin
McCarthy. That rolled back domestic spending levels, while preserving
the administration's proposal for the Pentagon intact. McCarthy, since
ousted as speaker, had been pressed by members of the right-wing
"Freedom Caucus" and their fellow travelers for just such spending cuts.
(He had little choice but to agree, since that group proved to be his
margin of victory in a speaker's race that ran to [15
ballots](https://www.cnn.com/2023/01/07/politics/kevin-mccarthy-path-to-speakership/index.html).)

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1568586973/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

There was a brief glimmer of hope that the budget cutters in the Freedom
Caucus might also go after the bloated Pentagon budget rather than
inflict all the fiscal pain on domestic programs. Prominent right-wing
Republicans like Representative Jim Jordan (R-OH)
[pledged](https://www.foxnews.com/politics/jordan-says-cuts-military-spending-table-money-should-not-go-woke-policies)
to put Pentagon spending reductions "on the table," but then only went
after the military's alleged "woke agenda," which boiled down to cutting
a few billion dollars slated for fighting racism and sexual harassment
while supporting reproductive freedom within the armed forces. Oh wait,
Jordan also went after spending on the development of alternative energy
sources as "woke." In any case, he focused on just a [minuscule
share](https://www.forbes.com/sites/williamhartung/2023/04/26/will-the-pentagon-win-the-debt-ceiling-fight/?sh=1ad45b851c8f)
of the department's overall budget.

Prominent Republicans outside Congress expressed stronger views about
bringing the Pentagon to heel, but their perspectives got no traction on
Capitol Hill. For instance, Kevin Roberts, the head of the Heritage
Foundation, perhaps America's most influential conservative think tank,
[made the
case](https://www.theamericanconservative.com/getting-serious-about-responsible-defense-spending/)
for reining in the Pentagon at *American Conservative* magazine:

> "In the past, Congress accepted the D.C. canard that a bigger budget
> alone equals a stronger military. But now, facing down a record debt
> to the tune of \$242,000 per household, conservatives are ready to
> tackle an entrenched problem and confront the political establishment,
> unaccountable federal bureaucrats, and well-connected defense
> contractors all at once in order to keep the nation both solvent and
> secure."

Even more surprising, former Trump Secretary of Defense Christopher
Miller released a
[memoir](https://thehill.com/policy/defense/3852632-former-acting-defense-chief-under-trump-calls-for-military-budget-to-be-cut-in-half/#:~:text=“We%20could%20cut%20o)
in which he called for a dramatic slashing of the Pentagon budget. "We
could," he argued, "cut our defense budget in half and it would still be
twice as big as China's."

Ultimately, however, such critiques had zero influence over the Pentagon
budget debate in the House, which quickly degenerated into a fight about
a series of [toxic
amendments](https://www.politico.com/news/2023/07/18/schumer-toxic-issues-could-torpedo-pentagon-bill-00106804)
attacking reproductive freedom and LGTBQ and transgender rights in the
military. Representative Colin Allred (D-TX) rightly
[denounced](https://allred.house.gov/media/press-releases/allred-statement-republicans-turning-bipartisan-defense-bill-shameful-display)
such amendments as a "shameful display of extremism" and
across-the-board
[opposition](https://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/4088555-top-house-armed-services-dem-worried-about-extreme-right-wing-amendments-filed-to-defense-bill/)
by Democrats ensured that the first iteration of the National Defense
Authorization Act for fiscal year 2024 would be defeated and some of the
most [egregious Republican
proposals](https://www.cnn.com/2023/12/13/politics/ndaa-defense-bill-what-is/index.html)
eliminated later in the year. 

In the meantime, virtually all mainstream press coverage and most
congressional debate focused on those culture war battles rather than
why this country was poised to shove so much money at the Pentagon in
the first place.

**Threat Inflation and the "Arsenal of Democracy"**

Perhaps you won't be surprised to learn that the strategic rationales
put forward for the flood of new Pentagon outlays don't faintly hold up
to scrutiny. First and foremost in the Pentagon's argument for virtually
unlimited access to the Treasury is the alleged military threat posed by
China. But as Dan Grazier of the Project on Government Oversight has
[pointed
out](https://www.pogo.org/reports/china-threat-inflation-and-americas-nonsensical-plans),
that country's military strategy is "inherently defensive":

> "\[T\]he investments being made \[by China\] are not suited for
> foreign adventurism but are instead designed to use relatively
> low-cost weapons to defend against massively expensive American
> weapons. The nation's primary military strategy is to keep foreign
> powers, and especially the United States, as far away from its shores
> as possible in a policy the Chinese government calls 'active
> defense.'"

The greatest point of potential conflict between the U.S. and China is,
of course, Taiwan. But a war over that island would come at a staggering
cost for all concerned and might even escalate into a nuclear
confrontation. A series of [war
games](https://www.csis.org/analysis/first-battle-next-war-wargaming-chinese-invasion-taiwan)
conducted by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS)
found that, while the United States could indeed "win" a war defending
Taiwan from a Chinese amphibious assault, it would be a Pyrrhic victory.
"The United States and its allies lost dozens of ships, hundreds of
aircraft, and tens of thousands of service members," it reported.
"Taiwan saw its economy devastated. Further, the high losses damaged the
U.S. global position for many years." And a [nuclear
confrontation](https://www.thenation.com/article/world/china-taiwan-nuclear-war/)
between China and the United States, which CSIS didn't include in its
assessment, would be a first-class catastrophe of almost unimaginable
proportions.

The best route to preventing a future Chinese invasion of Taiwan would
be to
[revive](https://nationalinterest.org/feature/worrisome-erosion-one-china-policy-206253)
Washington's "One China" policy that calls for China to commit itself to
a peaceful resolution of Taiwan's status and for the U.S. to forswear
support for that island's formal independence. In other words,
diplomacy, rather than increasing the Pentagon budget to "win" such a
war, would be the way to go.

The second major driver of higher Pentagon budgets is allegedly the
strain on this country's arms manufacturing base caused by supplying
tens of billions of dollars of weaponry to Ukraine, including artillery
shells and missiles that are running short in American stockpiles. The
answer, according to the Pentagon and the arms industry, is to further
[supersize](https://www.c4isrnet.com/battlefield-tech/2023/09/26/pentagon-acquisition-chief-laplante-focused-on-boosting-manufacturing/)
this country's already humongous military-industrial complex to produce
enough weaponry to supply Ukraine (and [now
Israel](https://www.vox.com/world-politics/2023/11/18/23966137/us-weapons-israel-biden-package-explained),
too), while acquiring sufficient weapons systems for a future war with
China.

There are two problems with such arguments. First, supplying Ukraine
[doesn't
justify](https://www.forbes.com/sites/williamhartung/2022/09/22/russias-invasion-of-ukraine-is-no-reason-to-increase-the-pentagon-budget/?sh=31638a3920d8)
a permanent expansion of the U.S. arms industry. In fact, such aid to
Kyiv needs to be accompanied by a now-missing diplomatic strategy
designed to head off an even longer, ever more grinding war.

Second, the kinds of weapons needed for a war with China would, for the
most part, be different from those relevant to a land war in Ukraine, so
weaponry sent to Ukraine would have little relevance to readiness for a
potential war with China (which Washington should, in any case, be
working to prevent, not preparing for). 

**The Disastrous Costs of a Militarized Foreign Policy**

Before investing ever more tax dollars in building an ever-expanding
garrison state, the military strategy of the United States in the
current global environment should be seriously debated. Just buying ever
more bombs, missiles, drones, and next-generation artificial
intelligence-driven weaponry is not, in fact, a strategy, though it is a
boon to the military-industrial complex and an invitation to a
destabilizing new arms race.

Unfortunately, neither Congress nor the Biden administration seems
inclined to seriously consider an approach that would emphasize
investing in diplomatic and economic tools over force or the threat of
force. Given this country's staggeringly expensive failures in its wars
in Iraq and Afghanistan in this century (which cost trillions of
dollars), resulting in hundreds of thousands of civilian casualties, and
leaving staggering numbers of American veterans with physical and
psychological injuries (as extensively
[documented](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/summary) by the
Costs of War Project at Brown University), you might think a different
approach to the use of your tax dollars was in order, but no such luck.

There are indeed a few voices in Congress advocating restraint at the
Pentagon, including Representatives Mark Pocan (D-WI) and Barbara Lee
(D-CA), who have
[proposed](https://lee.house.gov/news/press-releases/reps-lee-pocan-reintroduce-people-over-pentagon-act-to-cut-bloated-defense-budget-by-100-billion)
a \$100 billion reduction in that department's budget as a first step
toward a more balanced national security policy.  Such efforts, however,
must overcome an inhospitable political environment created by the
endlessly exaggerated military threats facing this country and the
political power of the arms industry, as well as its allies in
Washington. Those allies, of course, include President Biden, who has
labeled the U.S. an "[arsenal of
democracy](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/10/20/remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-unites-states-response-to-hamass-terrorist-attacks-against-i)"
in his efforts to promote a new round of weapons aid to Ukraine.  Not
unlike his predecessor, he is
[touting](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/biden-israel-ukraine-aid/)
the potential benefits of arms-production investments in companies in
electoral swing states.

Sadly, throwing more money at the arms industry sacrifices future needs
for short-term economic gains that are modest indeed. Were that money
[going
into](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2019/March%202019%20Job%20Opportunity%20Cost%20of%20War.pd)
producing green jobs, a more resilient infrastructure, improved
scientific and technical education, and a more robust public health
system, we would find ourselves in a different world. Those should be
the pillars of any American economic revival rather than the
all-too-modest side effects of weapons development in fueling economic
growth. Despite huge increases in funding since the 1980s, actual jobs
in the arms manufacturing industry have, in fact,
[plummeted](https://www.ndia.org/-/media/sites/ndia/policy/vital-signs/2023/ndia_vitalsigns2023_final_v3.pdf?download=1?download=1)
from three million to 1.1 million --- and, mind you, those figures come
from the arms industry's largest trade association. 

The United Auto Workers, one of the unions with the most members working
in the arms industry, has recognized this reality and formed a Just
Transition Committee. As noted by Spencer Ackerman at [the
*Nation*](https://www.thenation.com/article/world/working-class-labor-foreign-policy-uaw/),
it's designed to "examine the size, scope, and impact of the U.S.
military-industrial complex that employs thousands of UAW members and
dominates the global arms trade." According to Brandon Mancilla,
director of the UAW's Region 9A, which represents 50,000 active and
retired workers in New York, New England, and Puerto Rico, the committee
will "think about what it would mean to actually have a just transition,
what used to be called a 'peace conversion,' of folks who work in the
weapons and defense industry into something else."

The UAW initiative parallels a sharp drop in unionization rates at major
weapons makers (as
[documented](https://inkstickmedia.com/top-defense-contractors-favor-relocations-expansions-in-anti-union-states/)
by journalist Taylor Barnes). To cite two examples: in 1971, 69% of
Lockheed Martin workers were unionized, while in 2022 that number was
19%; at Northrop Grumman today, a mere 4% of its employees are
unionized, a dip that reflects a conscious strategy of the big
weapons-making firms to
[outsource](https://inkstickmedia.com/top-defense-contractors-favor-relocations-expansions-in-anti-union-states/)
work to non-union subcontractors and states with anti-union "right to
work" laws, while
[exporting](https://f35baddeal.wordpress.com/2014/05/01/promising-the-sky-pork-barrel-politics-and-the-f-35-combat-aircraft/)
tens of thousands of jobs overseas as part of multinational projects
like the F-35 program. So much for the myth that defense industry jobs
are more secure or have better pay and benefits than jobs in other parts
of the economy.

A serious national conversation is needed on what a genuine *defense*
strategy would look like, rather than one based on fantasies of global
military dominance. Otherwise, the overly militarized approach to
foreign and economic policy that has become the essence of Washington
budget-making could be extended endlessly and disastrously into the
future, something this country literally can't afford to let happen.

Copyright 2024 William D. Hartung

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest *Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

**William D. Hartung**, a [*TomDispatch* regular](https://tomdispatch.com/what-price-defense-2/), is a senior
research fellow at the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft and
the author of \"[Reality Check: Chinese Military Spending in
Context](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/ChinaUSspending).\"

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com) where this
article originally appeared , without the title image.
