# Israel, the United States, and the Rhetoric of the War on Terror

![](netanyahu.jpg){class="a"}

### From September 11, 2001, to October 7, 2023 (and Beyond)

## By [Maha Hilal](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/mahahilal/)

In a *New Yorker* piece published five days after the attacks of
September 11, 2001, American critic and public intellectual Susan Sontag
[wrote](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2001/09/24/tuesday-and-after-talk-of-the-town),
"Let's by all means grieve together. But let's not be stupid together. A
few shreds of historical awareness might help us understand what has
just happened, and what may continue to happen." Sontag's desire to
contextualize the 9/11 attacks was an instant challenge to the
narratives that President George W. Bush would soon deploy, painting the
United States as a country of peace and, most importantly, innocent of
any wrongdoing. While the rhetorical strategies he developed to justify
what came to be known as the Global War on Terror have continued to this
day, they were not only eagerly embraced by Israel in 2001, they also
lie at the heart of that country's justification of the genocidal
campaign that's been waged against the Palestinian people since October
7, 2023.

On September 20, 2001, President Bush delivered a speech to Congress in
which he shared a carefully constructed storyline that would justify
endless war. The United States, [he
said](https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2001/09/20010920-8.html),
was attacked because the terrorists "hate our freedoms --- our freedom
of religion, our freedom of speech, our freedom to vote and assemble and
disagree with each other." In that official response to the 9/11
attacks, he also used the phrase "war on terror" for the first time,
[stating](https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2001/09/20010920-8.html)
(all too ominously in retrospect): "Our war on terror begins with
al-Qaeda, but it does not end there. It will not end until every
terrorist group of global reach has been found, stopped, and defeated."

[]{#anchor}"Americans are asking," he went on, "why do they hate us?"
And then he provided a framework for understanding the motives of the
"terrorists" precluding the possibility that American actions prior to
9/11 could in any way have explained the attacks. In other words, he
positioned his country as a blameless victim, shoved without warning
into a "post-9/11 world." As Bush put it, "All of this was brought upon
us in a single day --- and night fell on a different world, a world
where freedom itself is under attack." As scholar Richard Jackson [later
noted](https://www.jstor.org/stable/48602563), the president's use of
"our war on terror" constituted "a very carefully and deliberately
constructed public discourse... specifically designed to make the war
seem reasonable, responsible, and inherently 'good.'"

**Your Fight Is Our Fight**

The day after the 9/11 attacks, then-Prime Minister Ariel Sharon gave a
televised address to Israelis, [saying
that](https://www.cnn.com/2001/WORLD/asiapcf/east/09/11/terror.reax/index.html)
"the fight against terrorism is an international struggle of the free
world against the forces of darkness who seek to destroy our liberty and
way of life. Together, we can defeat these forces of evil." Sharon, in
other words, laid out Israel's fight in the same binary terms the
American president would soon use, a good-versus-evil framework, as a
way of rejecting any alternative explanations of those assaults on the
Pentagon and the World Trade Center in New York City that killed almost
3,000 people. That December, Sharon
[responded](https://wrlc-amu.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=alma9968271803604102&context=L&vid=01WRLC_AMU:prod&lang=en&search_scope=WRLC_P_AU&adaptor=Local%20Search%20Engine&tab=WRLC_P_AU&query=any,contains,The%20War%20on%20Terror%20in%20Comparative%20Perspective:%20US%20Security%20and%20Foreign%20Policy&offset=0)
to an attack in Jerusalem by two Palestinian suicide bombers by saying
that he would launch his own "war on terror... with all the means at our
disposal."

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506470467/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

On the day of Bush's September 20th speech, Benjamin Netanyahu, then
working in the private sector after holding various positions within the
Israeli government, capitalized on the president's narrative by
asserting Israel's enthusiastic support for the United States. In a
statement offered to the House Government Reform Committee, emphasizing
his country's commitment to fighting terrorism, Netanyahu
[stated](https://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/netanyahu.htm), "I am
certain that I speak on behalf of my entire nation when I say *today*,
we are all Americans --- in grief, as in defiance."

**Israel's "9/11"**

Just as the 9/11 attacks "[did not speak for
themselves](https://www.jstor.org/stable/48602563#:~:text=First%2C%20and%20foundationally%2C%20the%20events,in%20the%20context%20of%20certain),"
neither did Hamas's attacks on Israel on October 7, 2023. In remarks at
a bilateral meeting with President Biden 11 days later, however, Prime
Minister Netanyahu strategically compared the Hamas attacks to the 9/11
ones, using resonant terms for Americans that also allowed Israel to
claim its own total innocence, as the U.S. had done 22 years earlier. In
that vein, [Netanyahu
stated,](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/10/18/remarks-by-president-biden-and-prime-minister-netanyahu-of-israel-before-bilateral-meeting-tel-aviv-israel/)
"On October 7th, Hamas murdered 1,400 Israelis, maybe more. This is in a
country of fewer than 10 million people. This would be equivalent to
over 50,000 Americans murdered in a single day. That's 20 9/11s. That is
why October 7th is another day that will live in infamy."

But 9/11Â doesn't live in infamy because it actually caused damage of any
long-lasting or ultimate sort to the United States or because it far
exceeded the scale of other acts of global mass violence, but because it
involved "[Americans as the victims of terror, not as the
perpetrators](https://books.google.com/books/about/American_Exceptionalism_and_American_Inn.html?id=yfFwDwAAQBAJ)"
and because of the way those leading the country portrayed it as
uniquely and exceptionally victimized. As Professor Jackson [put
it](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17419160500322517),
9/11 "was immediately iconicized as the foremost symbol of American
suffering." The ability to reproduce that narrative endlessly, while
transforming 9/11 into a date that transcended time itself, served as a
powerful lesson to Israel in how to communicate suffering and an
omnipresent existential threat that could be weaponized to legitimize
future violent interventions. By framing the Hamas attacks on October
7th similarly as a symbol of ultimate suffering and existential threat,
Israel could do the same.

Giving Israel further license for unfettered state violence under the
guise of a war on terror, in remarks in Tel Aviv President Biden [stated
that](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/10/18/remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-october-7th-terrorist-attacks-and-the-resilience-of-the-state-of-israel-and-its-people-tel-aviv-israel/)
"since this terrorist attack... took place, we have seen it described as
Israel's 9/11. But for a nation the size of Israel, it was like 15
9/11s. The scale may be different, but I'm sure those horrors have
tapped into... some kind of primal feeling in Israel, just like it did
and felt in the United States."

It bears noting that while Israel quickly deployed the rhetoric of the
War on Terror on and after October 7th, weaponizing the language of
terror was not in and of itself novel in that country. For example, in
1986, Benjamin Netanyahu edited and contributed to a collection of
essays called *Terrorism: How the West Can Win* that spoke to themes
similar to those woven into the U.S. war on terror narrative. However,
in responding to Hamas's attacks, Israel's discursive strategy was both
to capitalize on and tether itself to the meanings the U.S. had
popularized and made pervasive about the 9/11 attacks.

**"Surprise" Attacks**

The power of that "primal feeling" was intensified by the way both the
United States and Israel feigned "surprise" about their countries being
targeted, despite evidence of impending threats both were privy to. That
evidence included a President's Daily Brief that Bush received on August
6, 2001, entitled "[Bin Laden Determined to Strike in
US](https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB116/pdb8-6-2001.pdf)," and
the possession by Israeli officials of [a Hamas battle plan
document](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/11/30/world/middleeast/israel-hamas-attack-intelligence.html)
detailing the potential attack a year in advance.

Just as Bush [referred
to](https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2001/09/20010920-8.html)
the 9/11 attacks as a surprise, [despite several years of conflict with
al-Qaeda and Osama bin
Laden](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/discounting-life/0D5158466AB3BF3C36446050D93B12CD)
(who [clearly
stated](https://www.versobooks.com/products/1952-messages-to-the-world)
that U.S. violence in Muslim-majority countries was the motivation for
the attacks), Netanyahu claimed the same after the Hamas attacks,
ignoring Israel's longtime chokehold on Gaza (and Palestinian areas of
the West Bank). Addressing Israeli citizens on the day of the attack,
Netanyahu [asserted
that](https://twitter.com/IsraeliPM/status/1710583005230575705?lang=en)
"we are at war, not in an operation or in rounds, but at war. This
morning, Hamas launched a murderous surprise attack against the State of
Israel and its citizens."

By portraying terrorism as a grave, unparalleled, and unpredictable
danger, both the United States and Israel framed their brutal wars and
over-responses as necessary actions. Even more problematically, both
tried to evade accountability for future acts by characterizing
themselves as coerced into the wars they then launched. Netanyahu
[typically asserted
o](https://twitter.com/IsraeliPM/status/1719080837574984042?lang=en)n
October 30th that, "since October 7th, Israel has been at war. Israel
did not start this war. Israel did not want this war. But Israel will
win this war."

All of these tactics are meant to create and perpetuate "[an extremely
narrow set of 'political
truths](https://wrlc-amu.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=cdi_openaire_primary_doi_90da058776768ae4a7a903e37085758e&context=PC&vid=01WRLC_AMU:prod&lang=en&search_scope=WRLC_P_AU&adaptor=Primo%20Central&tab=WRLC_P_AU&query=any,contains,Security%20%20Democracy%20%20and%20the%20Rhetoric%20of%20Counter-Terrorism)'"
(or untruths, if you prefer). Whether ingrained in the public
consciousness by the United States or Israel, such "truths" were meant
to dictate just who the "terrorists" were (never us, of course), their
irrational, barbaric, uncivilized nature, and so, why intervention ---
full-scale war, in fact --- was necessary. An additional rhetorical goal
was to position the dominant narrative, whether American or Israeli, as
a "[natural
interpretation](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/narrative-and-the-making-of-us-national-security/796250037A6394BB71A07D197BF5D636)"
of reality, not a constructed one.

Israel has relied on such a framework to consistently peddle a
depoliticized narrative of Hamas, which roots any violence committed in
a fundamental and irrational opposition to the state of Israel and
inherent hatred of the Jewish people as opposed to the longstanding
regime of occupation, apartheid, and now genocide of Palestinians. Hamas
and other non-state actors are, of course, always portrayed as "driven
by fanaticism," as [Scott
Poynting](https://www.routledge.com/search?author=Scott%20Poynting)[ and
](https://www.routledge.com/search?author=Scott%20Poynting)[David Whyte
note](https://www.routledge.com/search?author=Scott%20Poynting), while
state violence, in contrast, is "presented as defensive, responsible,
rational, and unavoidable --- and not motivated by a particular
ideological bias or political choice."

**The Threat of Terrorism** **and Moral Equivalencies**

Terrorist violence in these years has regularly been weaponized in the
service of state violence by conceiving of its threat as almost
unimaginably dangerous. Both the United States and Israel have
represented
[terrorism](https://wrlc-amu.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=cdi_openaire_primary_doi_90da058776768ae4a7a903e37085758e&context=PC&vid=01WRLC_AMU:prod&lang=en&search_scope=WRLC_P_AU&adaptor=Primo%20Central&tab=WRLC_P_AU&query=any,contains,Security%20%20Democracy%20%20and%20the%20Rhetoric%20of%20Counter-Terrorism)
as "catastrophic to democracy, freedom, civilization and the American
\[or Israeli\] way of life," and "a threat commensurate with Nazism and
Communism."

As with Bush's
[argument](https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2001/09/20010920-8.html#:~:text=We%20have%20seen%20their%20kind,%2C%20and%20Nazism%2C%20and%20totalitarianism.)
that the 9/11 attackers were the "heirs of all the murderous ideologies
of the twentieth century" and that "they follow in the path of fascism,
and Nazism, and totalitarianism," Netanyahu urged a mobilization of
countries across the world to eliminate Hamas on a similar basis. To
this end, he [asserted
that](https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/remarks-prior-meeting-with-prime-minister-benjamin-netanyahu-israel-tel-aviv-israel)
"just as the civilized world united to defeat the Nazis and united to
defeat ISIS, the civilized world must unite to defeat Hamas."

American officials regularly frame U.S. violence as a function of the
country's inherent goodness and superiority. For example, in September
2006, responding to criticisms of the moral basis for the War on Terror,
Bush [said](https://innocentuntilprovenmuslim.com/book) at a press
conference: "If there's any comparison between the compassion and
decency of the American people and the terrorist tactics of extremists,
it's flawed logic... I simply can't accept that. It's unacceptable to
think that there's any kind of comparison between the behavior of the
United States of America and the action of Islamic extremists who kill
innocent women and children to achieve an objective."

By the time Bush made those remarks, the invasions of and wars in both
Afghanistan and Iraq, as well as other "counterterrorism" operations
across the globe, had been underway for years. Given the [staggering
number](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/WarDeathToll)
of civilians already killed, drawing a demarcation line between the
United States and "Islamic extremists" based on the slaughter of
innocent women and children should hardly have been possible (though
when it came to those killed by Americans, the term of the time was the
all-too-dehumanizing "collateral damage").

No stranger to weaponizing the language of moral equivalencies,
Netanyahu has repeatedly highlighted the victims of Hamas's attacks in
order to distinguish them from Israel's. For example, he described Hamas
as "an enemy that murders children and mothers in their homes, in their
beds. An enemy that kidnaps the elderly, kids, youths. Murderers who
massacre and slaughter our citizens, our kids, who just wanted to have
fun on the holiday." But like the United States, Israel has killed women
and children on a strikingly greater scale than the non-state actors
they were comparing their violence to. In fact, in the last 100 days of
Israel's war, it is believed to have killed [more than 10,000
children](https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/gaza-10000-children-killed-nearly-100-days-war)
(and those figures will only rise if you include children who are now
likely to [die from](https://www.commondreams.org/news/gaza-famine)
starvation and disease in a devastated Gaza).

**Birds of Violent Rhetorical Feathers Flock Together**

In a White House briefing a week after the Hamas attacks, Biden said,
"These guys --- they make al-Qaeda look pure. They're pure --- they're
pure evil." Then, nearly three weeks after those October 7th attacks, in
a meeting with French President Emmanuel Macron,
[Netanyahu](https://www.gov.il/en/departments/news/pm-netanyahu-meets-with-french-president-emmanuel-macron-24-oct-2023)
asserted that his country was in "a battle" with "the Axis of Evil led
by Iran, Hezbollah, Hamas, Houthis, and their minions." More than two
decades earlier, President George W. Bush had [uttered similar
words](https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/onpolitics/transcripts/sou012902.htm#:~:text=States%20like%20these%2C%20and%20their,means%20to%20match%20their%20hatred.),
referring to Iran, Iraq, and North Korea as an "axis of evil," who were
"arming to threaten the peace of the world."

In each case, the "evil" they were referring to was meant to communicate
an inherent and innate desire for violence and destruction, irrespective
of the actions of the United States or Israel. As the saying goes, evil
is as evil does.

As scholar Joanne Esch has
[noted](https://www.jstor.org/stable/20721298), "If they hate us for who
we are rather than what we do, nothing can be gained from reexamining
our own policies." In other words, no matter what we do, the United
States and Israel can insist on a level of moral superiority in taking
on such battles as the harbingers of good. And it was true that,
positioned as a battle of good versus evil, the all-American war on
terror did, for a time, gain a kind of "[divine
sanction](https://wrlc-amu.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=cdi_openaire_primary_doi_90da058776768ae4a7a903e37085758e&context=PC&vid=01WRLC_AMU:prod&lang=en&search_scope=WRLC_P_AU&adaptor=Primo%20Central&tab=WRLC_P_AU&query=any,contains,Security%20%20Democracy%20%20and%20the%20Rhetoric%20of%20Counter-Terrorism),"
which Israel has used as a blueprint.

In response to the recent International Court of Justice complaint
submitted by South Africa charging Israel with genocide, a defiant Prime
Minister Netanyahu
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/IsraeliPM/status/1746277888242897351) that
his country would continue its Gazan war until it was over. He also
mentioned a meeting he had with U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken
in which he told him, "This is not just our war --- it is also your
war."

If Israel's U.S.-backed genocide of the Palestinians has revealed
anything about the power of discourse, it's that the war on terror
narrative has proven to be remarkably enduring. This has enabled both
states to make use of specific schemas that were constructed and
deployed in Washington to explain the 9/11 attacks --- and now to
justify a genocidal war in a world where "terror" is seen as an eternal
threat to "liberal democracies."

In his book [*Narrative and the Making of US National
Security*](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/narrative-and-the-making-of-us-national-security/796250037A6394BB71A07D197BF5D636),
Donald Krebs argues that, when it comes to politics, language "neither
competes with nor complements power politics: it is power politics." In
this vein, it remains critical to subvert such destructive and pervasive
narratives so that countries like the United States and Israel can no
longer maintain "necropolitical" rule domestically or globally --- that
is, in the words of Cameroon historian and political theorist [Achille
Mmembe](https://muse.jhu.edu/search?action=search&query=author:J.-A.%20MbembÃ©:and&min=1&max=10&t=query_term),
"the power and the capacity to dictate who may live and who must die."

Copyright 2024 Maha Hilal

*FollowÂ TomDispatchÂ onÂ *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)*Â and
join us onÂ *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopianÂ novel,Â *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*Â (the
final one in his Splinterlands series),Â Beverly Gologorsky's
novelÂ *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,Â and
Tom Engelhardt'sÂ *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy'sÂ *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower'sÂ *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Maha Hilal](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/mahahilal/)

Dr.Â MahaÂ Hilal is the founding Executive Director of the Muslim
Counterpublics Lab and author of [*Innocent Until Proven Muslim:
Islamophobia, the War on Terror, and the Muslim Experience Since
*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506470467/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[*9/11*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506470467/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).Â 
Her writings have appeared in
[Vox](https://www.vox.com/first-person/2019/11/22/20976571/the-report-cia-adam-driver-torture),[Â Al
Jazeera](https://www.aljazeera.com/author/maha_hilal_170814052748869),[Â Middle
East Eye](https://www.middleeasteye.net/users/maha-hilal),Â [the Daily
Beast](https://www.thedailybeast.com/author/maha-hilal),Â [Newsweek](https://www.newsweek.com/watchilist-unconstitutional-two-classes-muslims-1459463),[Â Business
Insider,](https://www.businessinsider.com/guantanamo-bay-prison-abolish-biden-bush-administration-war-terror-2021-2)Â andÂ [Truthout](https://truthout.org/authors/maha-hilal/),
among other places.

Thanks to "[TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)" where this article origianlly appeared, without the title image.
