# Letters To The Editor

RE: [Israel, the United States, and the Rhetoric of the War on Terror](https://southerncrossreview.org/156/hilal-israel-terror.html) by Maha Hilel

Hi Frank,

Great article. There is a fellow Hungarian/Canadian jewish physician,
[Gabor Maté](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gabor_Maté), who himself is a
Holocaust survivor - still condemns Israel\'s genocide of the
Palestinians: <https://x.com/NadineNilo/status/1712432606120140896>

Take care,

Norbert Hanny

RE: [Bombing Muslims for Peace](https://southerncrossreview.org/156/astore-bombing-muslims.html) by William Astore

From the article:

It sees all Palestinians as essentially members of Hamas and thus
complicit in last year's brutal October 7th attacks on Israel, making
them legitimate targets of war, Israeli- (and American-) style. Just
like the United States, Israel claims to be "defending democracy"
whatever it does. Little wonder, then, that Washington has been so
willing to send bombs and bullets to its protégé as it seeks "peace"
through massive firepower and genocidal destruction.

Indeed, of late, there has been considerable debate about whether Israel
is engaged in acts of genocide, with the International Court of Justice
ruling that the present government should strive to prevent just such
acts in Gaza. Putting that issue aside, it's undeniable that Israel has
been using [indiscriminate
bombing](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/biden-takes-a-tougher-stance-on-israels-indiscriminate-bombing-of-gaza) attacks
and a devastating invasion in a near-total war against Palestinians
living on that 25-mile-long strip of land, an approach that calls to
mind the harrowing catchphrase "Exterminate all the brutes!" from Joseph
Conrad's novel **Heart of Darkness**.

If all Palestinians were legitimate targets of war,  there would be no
21% of Palestinians living happily in Israel, at least so happy as not
having any desire of leaving the country. If they would emigrate to an
Arab or Muslim country, they would not be able to participate in a gay
parade as the world-wide famous one in Tel Aviv, they would not have the
rights and freedom they have in Israel. If Israel wanted to
commit genocide in Gaza, there would be now hundreds of thousands of
deaths there, instead of the terrible 20 or 30,000 alleged by the Hamas,
a notorious liar (Israel claims that 9,000 were Hamas members). How many
civilians were killed because Hamas uses them as shields? Israel is the
only country in the world that announces where it is going to attack. I
have no idea if Israel could have been mor target-oriented in its
attack, saving civilians. But what was the alternative as a response to
the barbaric Oct. 7 attacks? Does Astore has a better solution? Maybe
doing nothing, sending a message to Hamas that it should repeat the
doses? Maybe just destroy part of the Hamas terrorists and facilities?
Peace is what Palestinians that are not terrorists want, those that are
not fanatics, and Israelis who are not fanatics. There is only one
reason for not existing peace between palestinians and israelis:
fanaticism in both sides. My sister-e-law, who is visitin gus from
Switzerland, was in Israel a couple of years ago and asked Palestinians
what they thought about the 2-State solution. Many answers were
astonishing: \"We don\'t want a 2-State solution, we want just a
one-State solution, just Israel.\" Because they know that under
Israel, they would have civil rights and freedom, which do not exist in
Arab and Muslim countries. 

If you can, send these considerations to Astore and ask him to show
where I am wrong. 

Valdemar W. Setzer - Dept. of Computer Science, University of São Paulo,
Brazil\
<https://www.ime.usp.br/~vwsetzer>  -  <https://youtube.com/@vwsetzer>

RE: [Three Versions of Judas](<https://southerncrossreview.org/156/borges-judas-eng.html>) by Jorge Luis Borges

Thanks for sharing this fine piece. I\'ll need to reread it many, very
many times. George M Young

RE: [The false Promise of ChatGPT](https://southerncrossreview.org/155/chomsky-a-i.html)

Thank you for this excellent article by Chomsky et.al. Chomsky puts into
words - in great clarity - what many, including myself, may feel
instinctively, sub-consciously. The subjective value is always missing
in whatever Chatgpt comes up with. Beyond the recital of facts and
opinions found in this vast and highly energy-burning collection of AI
data, the exchange involved in a \"non-conversation\" very quickly
becomes boring and counter-productive. Answers always sound elaborate,
and yet, there's no meat to them. As an ordinary individual with no
particular professional intentions, Chatgpt, for all its massive input
and ingenuity, soon becomes another unused, dusty toy in the digital
world. Imagine being stranded on a vacation with Chatgpt or a human.
Which would you prefer? What a phenomenal waste.

Sender identity lost -- sorry. If you read this, please advise. (Ed.)

RE: [Death is Not Proud](https://southerncrossreview.org/156/fts-life-and-death-2.html) by Frank Thomas Smith

I LOVE this.  

2 minute hardly important points:

1\. you wrote this nearly 11 years ago ?  are you really 92 this year
Frank Thomas ?  that\'s quite an achievement

2\. Man has not really been concerned with death for eons, or at least
not with death of the body.  According to our friend Rudolf Steiner,
even a few cultural epochs ago, people didn\'t really concern themselves
with death.  They knew when a person died, but didn\'t have the modern
angst about what happens when I die.  Sort of like animals - my cat
knows the mouse is dead, but it means little to him except the fun is
over. I have more weird examples but don\'t want to bore or offend
you. Anyhow, I can easily find a reference for that if you\'d like
one. Death has taken on this looming presence because of the dark side
of consciousness soul - intellectual doubt of spirit.  You bring that
forward in your article.

Thanks for your wonderful submissions to my Inbox.

Warmest,

Raun Griffihs

in rural Canada, the Prison Outreach gal

RE: [What Is Waldorf Education?](https://southerncrossreview.org/156/sagarin-waldorf.html)

HI, Frank, 

Thanks for the very interesting article by Stephen Sagarin.

I have some comments on his text.

Steiner did not base himself on the educational work and principles of
others. He used something no other educator had used. For instance,
Emerson\'s and Pestalozzi ideas were correct intuitions they had; but
their ideas did not stem from a direct perception of the spiritual
world, as happened with Steiner. The latter used this perception to
study the development of the human being, and also of history, and
applied this knowledge to education. Nobody else did that. For instance,
this prompted him to give a totally original view of the development of
philosophy, based on the development of consciousness, in his monumental
*The riddles of philosophy* (*Die Rätsel der Philosophie, *GA 18). The
analogy of a child\'s development with the historical ontogenesis was
not abstract but based upon direct spiritual perceptions. Sagarin seems
to have difficulties with this fact when he writes:

Some Waldorf teachers may argue that principle four may be found in many
schools, but that Waldorf schools mean something different by "spirit".
I'm not convinced of this however, and, in any event, it needn't be so.

This shows that either Sagarin does not know enough Anthroposophy, or he
could not accept it. The recognition of the spirit in the human being,
and its development and reincarnation, as well as the existence and
development of the other supersensible members, cannot be separated in
any application of Anthroposophy. For a teacher, the recognition that
they exist and understanding them \-- only Steiner gave us this
knowledge \-- is enough to give an adequate attitude regarding his/her
pupils. 

Speaking about that attitude, Sagarin does not mention the unselfish
love the teacher has to devote to his/her pupils. This love has to be
based upon the teacher\'s understanding of what a child is and his/her
development according to age. Only Steiner gave us this knowledge. For
instance, knowing that the mission of humanity is developing free will
and unselfish love, the teacher must try to develop these qualities,
according to the age of his/her pupils. Sagarin does not mention one of
the basic principles of WE: the teacher in primary school (up to 8th
grade) has to exercise \"authority with love\". In high school, the
teacher has to be admired for his knowledge of the subject and of
reality, her/his enthusiasm for them, and the respect s/he should
dedicate to his pupils.

One aspect not covered by Sagarin is the absence of tests and flunking.
I wonder if this was new in WE. But if not, Seiner introduced this idea
not imitating what had already been proposed, but out of his knowledge
of the terrible consequences they had (fear, tension and traumas) and
that they were not necessary for good learning. Many WS give tests in
high school, but mainly so the students may evaluate what they are
learning and orient their teachers accordingly, also preparing the
former for the terrible tests in college. Tests and flunking are a means
by bad teachers to force their students to learn \-- and forget the
subject as fast as they learned just before a test. 

Once Steiner referred to the fact that some of his teachings were
already known. He said that the truth is the same everywhere. But one
should not ignore the many original ideas he brought, for instance for
understanding the Bible (e.g. GA 122) and the Gospels (GAs 8, 103, 112,
114, 123, 131, 139).

Valdemar Setzer

Sao Paulo
