# The Magic Mound 

![](magic-mound-cover.png){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 12

### The Raven

The trail became steeper and the vegetation scarcer as Sergio, Divino
and Platero continued to climb. It was also much colder and the boys
were grateful for their tararobes and Platero was grateful for his
silver necklace. Their breath formed miniature clouds that were whisked
behind them by a brisk wind. It took them three days to reach a point
from where Arman\'s castle was visible. Divino saw it first when they
woke up on the fourth morning after having separated from Tamoshot. It
was wreathed in mist and blended so well into the mountain rock that
less observant eyes would not have noticed it.

\"What will Arman do if he catches us?\" Divino asked his brother.

\"We should have asked Tamoshot about that,\" Sergio answered. \"It\'s
too late now though, so let\'s go on.\"

\"I\'m afraid, Sergio.\"

\"Would you like to go back to Maxanatara and look for the magic
mound?\"

Divino considered this suggestion. \"What about the Raven?\" Divino was
more curious about the bird than about its secret.

\"How do we know that Tamoshot was telling the truth?\" Sergio said.
\"We don\'t even know if that\'s his real name.\"

\"I thought he was our friend?\"

\"Maybe, but he could also be Arman\'s spy.\"

\"Do you think so?\"

\"No, but we can\'t be sure, that\'s all.\"

But Divino was sure that Tamoshot was a friend. Sergio knew that his
brother, despite his youth, had excellent intuition as far as people
were concerned. If he said that someone was good, then he was good, and
if he said that someone was bad, he was likely to be very bad. Sergio
had never known him to be wrong, although his experience was limited to
the people of the favela. Neither of them had ever known someone like
Tamoshot. \"All right,\" Sergio said, deciding to trust Divino\'s
intuition, \"we\'ll find out the secret from the raven if we can.\"

They made their way up the steeply rising trail and were glad of the
thick mist which made them invisible to anyone who might be watching
from the castle. Another half a day passed before they reached the
castle. Greenish-gray smoke poured from its smokestack and was carried
by the wind down into the valley. A wafer of dark smoke covered the
whole valley. A drawbridge was lowered over the moat and they could
have walked across it and through the open gate into a dark courtyard.
The castle was an ugly mass of uneven stones discolored by pollution
from the noxious smoke, most of which was carried off into the valley
by strong winds sweeping from over the mountain behind the castle. No
human being or animal was to be seem or heard. Platero had hung back
the last fifty yards and Divino had to urge him along by pulling on
his silver collar. To tell the truth, Divino would have liked to hang
back as well.

\"What are we going to do, Sergio?\" Divino asked.

\"We better go around the back, this looks too easy,\" Sergio answered
nervously. \"But I don\'t know how we\'ll get over the moat if we leave
the drawbridge.\" He turned right and led the way around the castle.
They had not gone far when a shrill voice cried out: \"*There is only
one entrance to this castle.*\"

The boys froze in their tracks and looked up at the castle, but saw no
one.

\"We are only passing by,\" Sergio called back in a wavering voice.

\"*Come in, we are hungry for company.*\"

\"Keep walking,\" Sergio whispered.

They walked on, trembling, until the voice spoke again: \"*There is only
one entrance to this castle.*\" They stopped and waited. \"*Come in, we
are hungry for company.*\"

Sergio started forward again leading Platero and Divino followed. The
went faster now and didn\'t stop until they reached the rear of the
castle where they could no longer hear the voice.

\"Let\'s get out of here, Sergio,\" Divino pleaded.

\"It\'s only the raven, they repeat the things they\'ve been taught.
Tamoshot told us the truth, so far.\" The need to reassure his brother
gave Sergio courage. \"We\'ll wait here until it\'s dark, then go back
to where we first heard the raven and you can tell it the words Tamoshot
taught us. Do you still remember them?\"

\"Yes, I think so. But what if they catch us?\"

\"We\'ll go very quietly. They can\'t see in the dark. Maybe there\'s no
one but the raven around.\"

\"Platero can\'t go quietly,\" Divino objected, \"his hoofs click on the
rocks.\"

\"You\'re right, we\'ll have to leave him here.\"

Darkness fell suddenly in the foul air. Divino told Platero to stay
where he was until they returned to get him, but when they started off
the donkey followed them.

\"Maybe we should tie him,\" Sergio said, but Divino wouldn\'t hear of
that.

\"You must wait here,\" he pleaded with Platero. \"It\'s only because
they\'d hear your hoofs on the rocks. Don\'t worry, we won\'t be long.\"
He patted him gently on the nose and followed Sergio on tip-toes.
Platero stood still looking sadly after them.

Soon they saw a yellow light beaming through the mist. When they got
closer they could see that it was coming from a window in the castle
wall. They stood across from the window on their side of the moat and
looked in. A jet-black raven with a red beak sat chained to its perch
near the window. It\'s back was towards them, but it suddenly made a
quick, twisting hop and glared down at them.

\"Can ravens see in the dark?\" Divino asked his brother.

\"I don\'t know, maybe.\"

The raven cocked its head to one side.

\"Go ahead, Divino, say it.\"

\"Divino cleared his throat and said as loudly as he dared:

*Raven, Raven, black as night,\
Raven, Raven, hear our plight,\
Gloom and shadow cloud our sight,\
Tell us how to reach the light.*

Nothing happened. \"Maybe it\'s the wrong raven,\" Divino whispered.
\"Shh,\" Sergio admonished.

Suddenly the raven hopped three times on its perch and screeched:

> > *Cross the river at a run,\
> > Fly above the chasm high,\
> > When the setting sun you spy\
> > Mark where the arc is high,\
> > Go to where the star is nigh,\
> > Leave not your task undone.*

Then the raven repeated the words, slowly this time and in a low voice.

\"Who\'s there?\" a man\'s gruff voice growled.* *

Sergio pulled Divino by the arm: \"Let\'s go - fast!\"

The ran as fast as they could in the dark back towards the rear of the
castle, stumbling on unseen stones. A squad of soldiers stormed out of
the castle and across the moat. They knew the terrain well and didn\'t
stumble, so were soon gaining on the boys. Just when it seemed they
would be caught for sure, the boys heard a *clippity-clop* in the
distance. They ran towards the sound and soon saw the white donkey
galloping their way. They jumped on Platero\'s back and flew headlong
back to the rear and up into the hills, zigzagging precariously between
the boulders. Divino, holding on to Sergio for dear life, thought how
lucky they were that Platero could see in the dark even better than the
raven. After climbing at a run for a good while, Platero stopped,
exhausted. They listened and heard the soldiers\' faint shouts from far
below:

\"They went that way on a dragon!\"

\"No, a white monster!\"

\"The went the other way on a flying serpent!\"

After hugging Platero, which pleased the donkey exceedingly, Sergio
decided to rest where they were until daybreak. As they were settling
down they heard wings flapping close above them. They looked up and saw
the raven\'s beak in the starlight. It circled over them three times,
but made no sound except the flapping wings.

\"He\'s free,\" Sergio said, \"just as Tamoshot said he would be.\"

After completing the third circle, the raven flew up and away into the
mountains as the boys waved their thanks.

### Chapter 13

### Gleb

The boys slept long and Platero had to wake them when the sun was
already over the horizon. Platero was anxious to get away from the
castle, for his instinct warned him that it was dangerous for donkeys as
well as for boys. Divino was of the same mind, but Sergio explained that
they would have to approach the castle in order to find the path. So
they set out.

\"Did you understand what the raven said?\" Divino asked his brother.
\"I didn\'t understand a word of it.\"

\"I don\'t understand what it means, but I think I remember it,\" Sergio
answered. \"I kept repeating it to myself when we were escaping from the
soldiers. I couldn\'t concentrate on it while we were running, but once
on Platero\'s back I could.

> > *Cross the river at a run*

must mean that we should run across the bridge.\"

\"The Westbridge?\"

\"Yes.\"

\"Why?\"

\"I don\'t know, but we better do it that way.

> > *Fly above the chasm high*

\"What does that mean, Sergio?\"

\"I wish I knew.\"

> > *When the setting sun you spy,\
> > Mark where the arc is high,\
> > Go to where the star is nigh.*

\"What does all that mean?\"

\"I don\'t know, but the last line is clear enough:

> > *Leave not your task undone.*

By now they could see the castle in the distance like a hulking blot on
the sky. Platero did not want to go closer to it because he could not
think so didn\'t understand why it was necessary. He had no choice but
to follow the boys, as all those who do not think must follow those who
do.

The boys had no desire to get too close to the castle either, so when
Sergio thought they had gone far enough, they made a wide sweep around
it and headed down the mountain where they expected to find the trail
again. This took what was left of the morning and when they found the
trail the sun was directly overhead. Just below them was the valley.
They could have reached down and touched the smog that filled it.

\"It\'s lucky the path doesn\'t go down into the valley,\" Divino said.

\"Yes,\" Sergio agreed, \"I don\'t think we\'d last long down there.\"

They were about to turn west on the trail when to their astonishment a
gray head popped up from the yellow smog. Platero brayed and the boys
stood with their mouths open. Wisps of smoke or fog fell from the head
and its hair became black instead of gray. It rose until the neck, chest
and finally the whole body of a humanoid something stood before them.
Its face was long and sallow and its body extremely thin and damp as
though it had just stepped out of a sewer. The cheeks caved in and the
mouth was like a dark, toothless cavern. Human hands with long claws
hung from its sides, but its bare feet, still partially hidden by the
smog, seemed to end in hoofs, like Platero\'s. It smiled, or tried to,
and the result was an unpleasant grimace. It coughed and spit a glob of
slime back into the smog from which it had emerged. Then it spoke in a
phlegmy, raw voice:

\"What have we here, two boys and an animal. Well, weeell, weeeell.\" He
coughed hard and deep and spit again. \"And what are we doing here?\"

Sergio stammered a reply: \"Ah..we..that is..we were going to the ..to
Maxalabora.\"

\"Ah, going to Maxalabora are we? And come from Arman\'s castle, have
we? That is unusual, for Arman\'s guests seldom leave - in one piece.\"
He started to laugh but a coughing fit cut him short.

\"We haven\'t come from the castle,\" Divino said, \"we went around
it.\" Sergio nudged him with an elbow to keep quiet.

\"I see, hmm (cough). I\'m Greb, the travelers\' aid. Anything I can do
to help you on your way, don\'t hesitate (cough, spit), no, never
hesitate.\"

\"That\'s kind of you Mr. Gleb,\" Sergio said, \"but we are on the right
path now and don\'t need any aid.\"

\"I sincerely, yes sincerely, hope you are right, but I doubt it. You
will never get to Maxalabora on this path, no never\"

\"Why not?\"

\"There\'s a river, yes a river, in the way.\"

\"Yes, but there\'s a bridge over the river, the Westbridge.\"

\"(Cough, cough) Have you seen it?\"

\"No.\" Sergio answered.\"

\"It\'s on our map,\" Divino said and Sergio nudged him again.

\"Map or no map, you won\'t find it, no you won\'t, because it doesn\'t
exist. It\'s a myth.\"

\"What are we going to do?\" Divino whispered to his brother.

\"No problem,\" Gleb said after coughing and spitting some more, \"the
way to Maxalabora is through my valley,\" and he pointed behind him.

Sergio looked doubtful. \"But with all that smoke and fog how would we
find the way?\"

\"No problem, no, no problem,\" Gleb said with a ghastly grin, \"I will
guide you, yes, I will guide you.\"

Sergio looked at his brother, then at Platero, who was taking advantage
of the pause to nibble at some sparse grass.

\"Will you excuse us for a moment, Mr. Gleb? I\'d like to consult our
map.\"

\"You won\'t find the Happy Valley on any map, but suit yourselves. Ha,
ha, (cough, cough, spit, spit).\"

Sergio drew Divino and Platero aside, took the map from Platero\'s
saddle-bag and pretended to study it. \"Do you trust him?\" he whispered
to Divino. \"No,\" Divino said, \"but if we don\'t go with him how will
we get to Maxalabora?\"

\"I think he\'s lying.\"

\"You mean the Westbridge exists?\"

\"Yes. Gleb might try to stop us though. We must be prepared for that.\"

\"How?\"

\"We\'ll both mount Platero when I give the word. Platero has already
shown that he can run very fast, can\'t you, Platero?\" The donkey
nodded.

\"Well, what does your lovely map say?\" Gleb called impatiently to them
from the other side of the path.

Before answering, Sergio replaced the map in the saddle-bag and strapped
it closed.

\"Well?\" Gleb shouted.

\"You were right, Mr. Gleb,\" Sergio said politely, \"There\'s no Happy
Valley on the map. There is a Death Valley though.\"

Gleb frowned. \"Never heard of it, (cough), no, never heard of it.\"

\"Now!\" Sergio said and he and Divino sprang onto Platero\'s spiny
back. \"Away, Platero, fast!\"

Platero leaped onto the path and sped away westward. Gleb ran
desperately after them with outstretched claws. He just managed to reach
Platero\'s rear flank with his left hand and inflicted a deep scratch.
But Platero\'s hide was thick and the wound only made him run faster.
Soon they left Gleb far behind.

When he was sure that Gleb could not catch up with them he told Platero
to stop. They dismounted and immediately set to cleaning the wound on
Platero\'s flank. \"This will need thorough cleaning in case Gleb had
poisoned claws. Don\'t worry, Platero, I\'ll do a good job.\"

\"Platero brayed, meaning that he wasn\'t worried, only glad to be away
from Gleb and able to rest.

\"I\'m so tired, Sergio,\" Divino said. \"Can we rest here and eat
something?\"

Sergio decided that they should not stay on the open path, so they left
it and camped behind some large rocks, hidden from the path. They took
dried fruit and nuts from the saddle-bags and Platero went off a short
way to graze and drink from a nearby spring.

To be continued.

[Chapters 10 & 11](https://southerncrossreview.org/155/magic-mound-10-11.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback
and kindle:

[The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)

and in Spanish at: 

[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)
