# Toward a Threefold Society

![](toward-threefold-book-cover.png){class="a" style="max-height:100%"}

## by Rudolf Steiner

### Preliminary Remarks Concerning the Purpose of this Book

The contemporary social situation poses grave and comprehensive
challenges. The demands which have arisen for new structures indicate
that the solutions to these challenges must be sought in ways which have
not been previously considered. Conditions being what they are, the time
has perhaps come when attention will be paid to one whose experience in
life obliges him to contend that thoughtlessness concerning the ways
which have become necessary has resulted in social chaos. The arguments
presented in this book are based on this opinion. They deal with the
prerequisites for transforming the demands of a large part of
contemporary humanity into purposeful social will. The formation of this
will should not depend on whether the demands please some of us or not.
They exist, and must be dealt with as social facts. This should be kept
in mind by those whose position in life causes them to find distasteful
my description of proletarian demands as something which must be
reconciled by social will. I wish to speak only in accordance with the
realities of contemporary life, insofar as my experience enables me to
do so. I have seen the inevitable consequences of ignoring the facts
which have unfolded in the life of modern man and of being blind to the
necessity of a social will to deal with them.

Self-styled experts in practical matters (what have come to be regarded
as practical matters under the influence of routine) will, at first, be
dissatisfied with the arguments presented in this book. But it is just
such persons as these who should undergo a relearning process, for their
'expertise' has been proven by recent events to be absolutely erroneous
and has led to disastrous consequences. They must learn to recognize
many things as practical which have seemed to them to be eccentric
idealism. They may be critical of the fact that the early parts of the
book deal more with the spiritual life of modern mankind than with
economics. The author is obliged however, from his personal knowledge of
life, to take the position that the errors of the past will only
multiply if the decision is not made to focus attention on modern
mankind\'s spiritual life. Equally dissatisfied with what I say in this
book will be those who are continuously intoning clich√©s about mankind
abandoning purely materialistic interests and turning to 'the spirit',
to 'idealism', for I attach little importance to the mere reference to
'the spirit' and talk about a nebulous spiritual world. I can only
recognize a spirituality which constitutes the life substance of
humanity. This manifests itself in the mastery of practical aspects as
well as in the formulation of a conception of the world and of life
which is capable of satisfying the needs of the soul. It is not a matter
of knowing --- or believing to know --- about spirituality, but that it
be a spirituality which is also applicable to the practical realities of
everyday life, one which accompanies these everyday realities and is not
a mere sideline reserved for the inner life of the soul. To the
'spiritualists' the arguments presented in this book will be too
unspiritual, while to the 'practical' ones they will seem unrealistic. I
am of the opinion, however, that I may be useful to contemporary society
in my way just because I do not share the impracticality of those
persons who consider themselves to be practical, nor can I find any
justification for the kind of talk about the 'spirit' that results in
illusions.

The 'social question' is spoken of in this book as an economic, a legal
rights and a spiritual-cultural question. I am convinced that the true
nature of this question reveals itself in the requirements of the
economic, rights and spiritual-cultural areas of society. The impulse
for a healthy coordination of these three areas within the social
organism can emerge from a recognition of this fact. During previous
periods of human evolution social instincts saw to it that the three
areas were integrated in society in a way which corresponded to human
nature as it was then. At the present however, it is necessary for
mankind to structure society by means of purposeful social will. Between
those past epochs and the present there is a confusion of old instincts
and modern consciousness which is no longer competent to deal with the
demands of modern mankind, at least as far as those countries are
concerned in which such a will is meaningful. Often the old instincts
persist in what passes today for purposeful social thinking. This
weakens thinking in relation to the tasks it must face. A more profound
effort than has been hitherto supposed must be made by the men and women
of the present in order to work their way free of what is no longer
viable. How the economic, rights and spiritual areas are to be
structured in a way which corresponds to the demands of modern society
can, in my opinion, only be determined if sufficient good will is
developed to recognize this fact. What I believe is necessary concerning
the shape such structures should take is submitted to contemporary
judgment by means of this book. My wish is to provide a stimulus along a
way which leads to social objectives that correspond to contemporary
realities and necessities. For he believes that only such efforts can
transcend emotionalism and utopianism where social will is concerned.

If, in spite of this, some readers find elements of this book utopian,
then the author would suggest they consider how often ideas concerning
possible social developments are so completely divorced from reality
that they degenerate into nonsense. For this reason, one is inclined to
find utopias even in arguments which derive from reality and direct
experience, as has been attempted in this book. One sees an argument as
'abstract' because only the habitual is 'concrete', and the concrete is
abstract if it does not coincide with the habitual manner of thinking.

I know that strict followers of party programs will at first be unhappy
with this book. Nevertheless, I am confident that many political party
people will soon come to the conclusion that events have already far
outstripped party programs and that a determination, independent of such
programs, concerning the immediate objectives of social will is, above
all, necessary.

April 1919, Rudolf Steiner

Translated by Frank Thomas Smith

To be continued.

This book is available in paperback and Kindle from [Toward a Threefold Society](https://www.amazon.com/Toward-Threefold-Society-Issues-Question/dp/1948302160)
