# A School System Goes to Hell and Back Again

![](system-failed.jpg){class="alarge"}

### A Pandemic Year of Hope, Trauma, and Tragedy, Up Close and Personal

## By [Frida Berrigan](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/fridaberrigan/)

*A kid spit on my husband Patrick yesterday.* That sentence just keeps
running through my head. The student was up on a windowsill at school
and, when instructed to come down, he spit.

It's part of Patrick's job not to take that --- the most personal of
insults and an almost universal expression of disrespect --- personally.
He knew enough about that boy and his sad story to see the truth of the
maxim "hurt people hurt."  In this case, it was also a matter of
"disrespected kids disrespect." So, he handled it and his emotional
response to the grossness of being spit on, too. He got that kid down
and back into class. Then he cleaned himself up and went on with his
day.

This is not the first time he's been spit on this year and it
probably won't be the last. It isn't even the worst. Once, he was so
covered in spittle he had to go home in the middle of the day to shower
and change clothes. And mind you, this is all happening during the
coronavirus pandemic and the mandatory mask wearing that is supposed to
keep his school safe (at least from the virus).

**Taking the Time**

My husband's official job title --- and I'll bet you didn't even know
such a job existed --- is Wellness Interventionist. (Another school
calls his position the Feelings Teacher.) He works at one of our
Connecticut town's four public elementary schools, trying to keep things
from getting overheated. He attempts to intervene in conflicts between
kids before they come to a head. He leads class-circle discussions about
emotional health, and helps students find more complex and nuanced ways
than just anger or derision to express their feelings. They are supposed
to seek him out for help navigating conflicts and repairing
relationships.

There's a jargonistic term for what he does: "restorative practices and
social-emotional learning." Because he works in a bureaucracy, you won't
be surprised to know that these terms have been reduced to the acronyms
RP and SEL. However fast those may be to say, though, the work itself
takes time, lots and lots of time, and time is the one thing my husband
seldom has in his fast-moving school days with almost 500 kids needing
attention.

He'll sit down with two kids at odds with each another and just as they
get to the crux of the matter, a call comes in over his walkie talkie
that a student has "eloped" (the term of art for escaping the building)
and is running towards the road. He'll be about to connect with a
youngster struggling with too many grown-up-sized problems at home, when
a teacher urgently calls him to a classroom to help manage a fourth
grader's water-bottle-throwing tantrum.

What choice does he have? In that case, he promised the student with the
home problems that he'd continue their conversation at lunch and
sprinted for the classroom. Patrick entered the room with a smile on his
face. In a calm voice he said, "Okay, friends, we are going to give X
some space now, so please go with your teacher to the library." He
helped her usher the boy's fearful, dumbstruck classmates out of the
room. "See you in a little bit," he said in his most reassuring voice,
before turning to that flailing, furious youngster.

With the rest of the students gone, the temper tantrum was no longer a
performance and so the two of them ended up working for almost an hour
cleaning up the mess. As they set tables upright, wiped up spilled
water, and taped torn posters back on walls, Patrick got the kid talking
about the problems that had all too literally exploded out of his small
body. No, my husband couldn't fix them, but he offered a little
perspective and some tools for managing anger more constructively. He
then reached out to the school's psychiatrist and social worker, while
offering support to the family.

And yes, I may not be the most objective witness, but Patrick is really
good at his job --- patient, friendly, and ready to help. When he needs
to restrain kids intent on hurting themselves or others, he does so with
a sense of moderation and equanimity right out of the "safety care"
training manual.

His problem, though, is time in a school and a system that, during the
pandemic, hasn't had enough teachers or para-educators or aides --- and,
all too typically, is losing more of them. The school's psychiatrist
just left for a better (less dangerous) job and the principal recently
announced that she's leaving at the end of the school year. There are a
dozen teachers [looking for new
jobs](https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2021/10/20/teachers-are-not-okay/)
or planning on early retirement. And yes, there are other staff trained
to deal with aspects of his job, but it's hard because too many of them
aren't fully capable of dealing with** **the** **physical demands of the
job. He has colleagues who are pregnant, smaller than some of the fourth
graders, or older enough not to want to risk an injured back or knee
from chasing or restraining kids.

**A Failure for Sure --- But Whose?**

All too often these days, my husband comes home sad, tired, and
dispirited. Unfortunately, his feelings and experiences are just one
person's tale in the sweeping epic of a failing and floundering school
system. Or maybe it's not just that system, but our whole society.

You probably won't be surprised to know that public schools have been in
perpetual crisis for a long time. Fill in the blank for the calamity of
your choice: from once-upon-a-time segregated schools and federal agents
escorting Black youngsters to school to today's fights over which
bathroom kids should use and who plays on what volleyball team. Schools
have long been the culture war's battlefield of choice.

Why is there public education and what is its purpose? If the original
system was built and funded at public expense to prepare the next
generation of factory workers, today's system is there so that parents
can work. Covid-19 revealed that sad truth. When schools shut down, so
does part of the economy. These days, they also provide a whole array of
social support for families badly in need, often including food,
clothes, health care, and access to technology.  

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642595780/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

The pandemic shutdowns revealed failures and weaknesses in a threadbare
social system, but it did allow certain strengths to shine through as
well. For one thing, the commitment of so many teachers, para-educators,
and support staff, often under remarkably difficult circumstances,
should be considered a marvel. Our educators are the under-appreciated,
underpaid, undervalued superheroes of the Covid era. They transitioned
to a new medium of education, the virtual classroom, and figured out how
to mobilize the sort of resources that students and their families need
just to keep going. School buses delivered computers, lunches, and
dinners. Teachers made themselves available after hours to walk families
through the new technology of schooling, even though they often had kids
of their own and elders to care for as well. And they did it all for far
too long amid the Trump administration's [dismal culture
wars](https://www.npr.org/2020/06/20/881096897/as-the-culture-wars-shift-president-trump-struggles-to-adapt)!

They worked on an emergency, pedal-to-the-metal footing for three
semesters before going back to in-person instruction in the [fall of
2021](https://www.thenation.com/article/society/schools-coronavirus-crisis-teachers/),
with masks, plexiglass barriers, and the constant threat of shutdowns.
They started the school year stressed and tired, and now, in April 2022,
they're exhausted.

**Rage or Gratitude (or Both?)**

You would think all of this would make a deep impression on my own
children, one in second grade and the other in fourth, who can sometimes
see their father in the hallways of their school. When it comes to
school, though, our two kids are in their own world --- one of new books
and good friends. At dinner, when we say grace, they're forever praising
their teachers. As far as they know, school is going great. I wouldn't
have it any other way, so out of their earshot Patrick and I try to talk
through his hard days.

In the face of it all, I feel both inchoate rage and extravagant
gratitude. The rage is easier. Patrick is dealing with many layers of
trauma and tragedy all at once in the minds and bodies of five to
12-year-olds. It should surprise no one that, after 18 months of virtual
"learning" and social isolation, kids are having a hard time
reacclimating.

Educators don't know everything that happened to every kid between March
2020 and September 2021, but they know enough to be sure that it was
often bleak: many had family members who lost jobs or even died. Some
moved into far smaller living spaces with more people or found
themselves left alone for long periods of time with just the Internet
and all its [dark corners
](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/complaint-alleges-children-discovered-pornography-while-browsing-on-school-issued-laptops/2020/11/24/8e9c7cac-2dc8-11eb-860d-f7999599cbc2_story.html)for
company.

I was so relieved when our kids went back to school, but I wished that
more time had been spent on reconnection, community rebuilding, and
healing. Of course, I wasn't in charge and had to watch helplessly as,
in September 2021, they instantly went back to standardized testing.

I blame the school system for charging full steam ahead over the minds
and bodies of the youngest, most vulnerable members of our community.
Yet I'm grateful as well. It's so confusing! In spite of everything, my
kids are so happy to be back and I find myself surprised, impressed, and
moved by what they bring home to share.

**Time Is Money**

Everyone has ideas about how to improve our schools and can point a
finger at those they blame for the failures in that system: absent or
omnipresent parents, video games and social media, cops in schools (as
symbols of public safety or emblems of the "school-to-prison" pipeline),
and that's just to begin down an endless list.

Wherever you want to lay the blame, the solution isn't hard to find,
it's just expensive.

An administrator told Patrick that the way to fix our schools would be
to have each teacher and aide deal with a class of just 12 students,
with plenty of time for exercise, recess, and the arts. Indeed, that
would undoubtedly fix many of the problems Patrick faces daily, because
so much of his work involves putting out fires long after they've broken
out. In a class of 12, a teacher would be able to give any smoldering
kid attention --- and some choices.

However, we already do invest a lot of money in our schools with
anything but the greatest results. According to the National Center for
Education Statistics, the United States
[spent](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator/cmd) \$14,100 per
elementary and secondary student in 2017 --- 37% more than the average
of \$10,300 paid by member countries of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development
([OECD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OECD#Current_members)), a group of
38 "highly developed" wealthy nations. On that list, only Luxembourg,
Austria, and Norway seem to spend more than the U.S. does, but the
academic performance numbers of many of those countries are so much
better than ours.

Why?  To explore the all-too-complicated answer to that question, you
would undoubtedly have to dive into this country's brutal history of the
transatlantic slave trade and racism, Calvinist notions of who deserves
to succeed, and so many other factors. But given [my own
background](https://tomdispatch.com/frida-berrigan-witness-to-war-american-style/),
I tend to think about it in terms of Washington's military budget --- in
terms, that is, of how poorly we invest staggering sums of our taxpayer
dollars. After all, it's not just how much you spend, it's
[how](https://www.cbpp.org/research/state-budget-and-tax/a-punishing-decade-for-school-funding)
you spend it! In our case, prodigiously on war and preparations for more
of it, rather than on our children.

The United States spends so much more on its military than any other
country (more than the next [11 countries
combined](https://sipri.org/sites/default/files/2021-04/fs_2104_milex_0.pdf),
according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute) and
we still aren't safer, not faintly so. When we "invest" [more than \$800
billion](https://www.politico.com/news/2022/03/28/biden-requests-largest-defense-budget-00020859)
annually in the military-industrial complex, as President Joe Biden
proposes to do in 2023, there are a lot of things we can't afford that
would actually make us safer. Money wasted on the military doesn't get
spent on mental health --- unsurprisingly, the man who [attacked that
Brooklyn subway
car](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/apr/17/brooklyn-subway-shooting-eric-adams-mayor-psychiatric-services),
injuring 23 people, suffered from mental illness --- and it doesn't get
spent on gun-safety measures either. According to the[ Gun Violence
Archive](https://www.gunviolencearchive.org/), more than 12,000 people
have been killed by guns so far this year alone in this disastrously
[over-armed
nation](https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/gun-ownership-by-country)
of ours. How can we even say that we're a nation at peace, given the
[endless
violence](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/12/us/road-rage-shootings-guns-texas.html)
and [mass
killings](https://www.gunviolencearchive.org/reports/mass-shooting) that
embroil us?

And guns aren't the only thing killing us either. While we spend so much
on military infrastructure, we don't repair the rest of our
infrastructure adequately. The American Society of Civil Engineers gives
that civil infrastructure (roads, bridges, parks, water systems, etc.) a
[C-minus grade](https://infrastructurereportcard.org/) and estimates the
spending needed there at \$2.59 trillion. Finally, military spending
hampers our ability to respond to genuine threats to safety and security
like the coronavirus pandemic, which has already
[killed](https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2022/03/covid-us-death-rate/626972/)
nearly a million Americans (and likely [many
more](https://missouriindependent.com/2021/12/22/uncounted-inaccurate-death-certificates-across-the-country-hide-the-true-toll-of-covid-19/)
than that).

Education suffers, too. While the U.S. toolbox may be full of hammers,
kids aren't nails. And while federal [education
spending](https://www.aft.org/sites/default/files/timetoact.pdf) is
relatively high, it's spent all too politically instead of going where
it's most needed. Take New London, Connecticut, where I live, for
example. I [looked
up](https://www.courant.com/education/hc-news-connecticut-sheff-v-oneill-settlement-graph-20220127-vcabce2xb5amxm2xeoc6defniq-story.html)
what we get per student per year and it was more than I thought:
\$16,498 (with \$1,210 coming from the federal government and the rest
from the state and local taxes).

Nonetheless, we're a [poor
community](https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/newlondoncityconnecticut).
The median income for a household in New London is about \$47,000, well
below the national average, and we have a home ownership rate of less
than 40%. So many families in our school district qualify for free or
reduced lunch that they just give every kid free lunch (and breakfast
and a snack, too) without any paperwork. A lot of the students in our
public schools are** **"[English Language
Learners](https://www.npr.org/sections/ed/2017/02/23/512451228/5-million-english-language-learners-a-vast-pool-of-talent-at-risk)"
(ELL), meaning they speak another language at home and need additional
support to learn the material in math or social studies as they are also
learning English. Many of them also have "Individualized Education
Plans" (IEPs) indicating that, with an attention-deficit or learning
disability, they need extra support and accommodation to learn. A
not-so-small minority
of [students](https://www.understood.org/en/articles/are-ieps-different-for-english-language-learners) are
ELL with IEPs. All that adds up to a lot of need and a lot of extra
expense. 

We should get more resources because our needs are high, but perversely
enough, the needier a school district is, the fewer resources it gets,
because in so many parts of the country education spending is pegged to
property taxes.  Chester, Connecticut, is just 20 miles away from here,
but it might as well be in another world. Their schools spend \$24,492
per student and have very few English-language learners in that very
white small community.

In our town, until the pandemic shut down the schools, one of the
elementary schools did double duty as a food pantry once a month. The
food line would then snake around the building, including parents,
grandparents, and people coming straight from work (among them,
custodians, cooks, and teachers from that very building). No one got
paid enough to turn down a free box of food toward the end of the month.

I helped out there sometimes and one thing struck me: the news media
never showed up. Not a single reporter.  That line of 200 or more people
who needed food badly enough to spend a few hours there at the end of a
workday just wasn't a big enough deal. If doctors had lined up around
the hospital in a similar fashion, or engineers and scientists employed
at our local weapons manufacturer, General Dynamics, maybe that would
have been news. But poor schools, poor people... nothing new there.

**It's Not Fair**

With his limited resources, Patrick is part social worker, part social
connector, part bouncer, part enforcer, and part small-group
facilitator. An administrator who makes three times his salary saw him
in action recently and said, "We should have five of you!" And she was
right. That school does need more people like him. Her tone, though, was
wistful, as if she were hoping for a unicorn for Christmas. Of course,
having the resources to pay people who are going to help create the
conditions under which children will learn in an optimal fashion
shouldn't be a fairy tale.

That kid on the windowsill probably needed more than any school could
give him. He probably needed a grief counselor and a psychiatrist, a
safe place to live and a good night's sleep, glasses, shoes that fit,
and a warmer jacket, too. And the one thing he knew for sure was that he
wouldn't get what he needed and it pissed him off. In that moment, I
suspect school stuff was far from his mind. He undoubtedly wasn't
worrying about his math scores or his reading level. My best guess is
that he wasn't thinking about the consequences of his actions either,
like being sent to the principal's office or getting suspended. From
what Patrick said afterward, it sounded like the kid was enraged,
suffering, deeply sad, over-stimulated, out of options, and couldn't
believe that any adult would listen to him express his problems with
words alone. 

Schools can't solve all of this society's problems. But every day, my
kids' teachers show up and try, just as Patrick does. It's not fair,
it's not working particularly well, but it does make a difference and
that's better than the alternative.

Copyright 2022 Frida Berrigan

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [Frida Berrigan](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/fridaberrigan/)

Frida Berrigan is the author of [*It Runs In The Family: On Being Raised
by Radicals and Growing into Rebellious
Motherhood*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1939293650/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
She is
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/a-christmas-confession/)[ regular](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176656/tomgram%3A_frida_berrigan%2C_%22we_get_to_live_in_the_mayor%27s_house%21%22) and
writes the [Little
Insurrections](http://wagingnonviolence.org/column/little-insurrections/) column
for [WagingNonviolence.Org](http://wagingnonviolence.org/). She has
three children and lives in New London, Connecticut, where she is a
gardener and community organizer.

Thanks to \<a href="tomdispatch.com"\> TomDispatch.com \</a\> where this
article originally appeared -- without the title image.

## 
