# Arsenal of Autocracy?

![](weapons-1.jpg){class="alarge"}

### The Major Weapons Makers Cash in Worldwide, Not Just in Ukraine

## By [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

These are good times to be an arms maker.  Not only are [tens of
billions](https://tomdispatch.com/the-new-gold-rush/) of dollars in new
military spending headed for the coffers of this country's largest
weapons contractors, but they're being praised as defenders of freedom
and democracy, thanks to their role in arming Ukraine to fight the
Russians. The last time the industry gained such a sterling reputation
was during World War II when it was lauded as the "[arsenal of
democracy](http://www.fdrlibraryvirtualtour.org/page07-06.asp)" for
fueling the fight against fascism. 

Raytheon CEO Greg Hayes recently underscored this point in an
[interview](https://hbr.org/2022/03/raytheon-ceo-gregory-hayes-how-ukraine-has-highlighted-gaps-in-us-defense-technologies)
with the *Harvard Business Review*. While discussing how he should
respond to criticism of his company benefiting from a rise in sales
right now, he said:

> []{#anchor}"Look, we don't apologize for making these systems, making
> these weapons. The fact is, they are incredibly effective in deterring
> and dealing with the threat that the Ukrainians are seeing today... I
> think again recognizing that we are there to defend democracy and the
> fact is eventually we will see some benefit in the business over
> time." 

Indeed, Raytheon will "see some benefit" from the war "over time."  The
company produces the
[Stinger](https://www.raytheonmissilesanddefense.com/what-we-do/counter-uas/effectors/stinger-missile)
anti-aircraft missile and co-produces (with Lockheed Martin) the
[Javelin](https://www.raytheonmissilesanddefense.com/what-we-do/land-warfare/precision-weapons/javelin-missile)
anti-tank missile, both of which Washington has provided to Ukraine by
the
[thousands](https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/3027295/fact-sheet-on-us-security-assistance-for-ukraine/). 
Now, the companies will be handsomely reimbursed as the Pentagon moves
to replenish its stockpiles of those systems. Those sales, in turn, will
bolster Hayes's annual [\$23
million](https://www.bizjournals.com/boston/news/2022/03/15/raytheons-ceo-total-pay-rose.html#:~:text=CEO%20Gregory%20Hayes%20was%20paid,and%20a%20%245%20million%20bonus.)
compensation package, which grew by 11% in 2021. It will undoubtedly
only rise more as the company is showered with new contracts tied to
Ukraine and other global conflicts.

Raytheon is, of course, anything but the only major arms manufacturer
reaping financial and reputational benefits from the war in Ukraine.
Earlier this month, President Biden singled out Lockheed Martin for
special praise when he
[toured](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/biden-to-visit-lockheed-plant-as-weapons-stockpile-strained/2022/05/03/8800eeb8-cae9-11ec-b7ee-74f09d827ca6_story.html)
the Alabama facility where it produces those Javelin missiles. It was
part of his effort to promote tens of billions of dollars in new aid for
Ukraine and transform himself into a war president.

These days, even arms industry CEOs are having their moment in the sun
as media stars.  On Mother's Day, for instance, Lockheed Martin CEO
James Taiclet was featured on CBS's *Face the Nation*. Because of the
softball questions served up by interviewer Margaret Brennan, media
critic Dan Froomkin at *Responsible Statecraft
*[described](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2022/05/11/face-the-nations-interview-with-arms-industry-ceo-turned-into-an-infomercial/)
the
[segment](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/jim-taiclet-transcript-face-the-nation-05-08-2022/)
all too accurately as an "infomercial."  Taiclet used the opportunity to
tout the rise of global tensions as a remarkable long-term business
opportunity for his company:

> "Well, we're planning for the long run and not just in the Javelin,
> because this situation, the Ukraine conflict, has highlighted a couple
> of really important things for us. One is that we need to have
> superior systems in large enough numbers... We know that there's going
> to be increased demand for those kinds of equipment, too, because the
> threat between Russia and China is just going to increase even after
> the Ukraine war \[that\] we hope is over soon. Those two nations and,
> regionally, Iran and North Korea are not going to get less active.
> Probably they're going to get more active. So we want to make sure we
> can supply our allies and our country what they need to defend against
> that."

The president has just approved a new [\$40
billion](https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-putin-biden-europe-0ac5c758d32dbea64c437b50e829bbb2)
aid package for Ukraine rushed through Congress --- an even higher
figure, you'll undoubtedly not be surprised to learn, than he asked for.
More than half of that package will go for military purposes, which
means the outlook for firms like Raytheon and Lockheed Martin couldn't
be brighter. Add to that new sales to NATO allies beefing up their
military budgets in response to the Russian invasion, as well as the
Pentagon's own astronomical budget --- slated to exceed [\$800
billion](https://www.politico.com/news/2022/03/28/biden-requests-largest-defense-budget-00020859)
for 2023 --- and the opportunities for profit seem nothing short of
endless.

And it's true that Ukraine does indeed need weapons to defend itself. In
the context of a policy in Washington designed, as Secretary of Defense
Lloyd Austin recently put it all too bluntly, to "[weaken
Russia](https://www.cnn.com/2022/04/25/politics/biden-administration-russia-strategy/index.html)"
rather than simply end the war, there is, however, a danger in sending
too much, too fast. After all, escalating the conflict in this way could
possibly lead to a direct confrontation between the U.S. and Russia, two
nuclear-armed nations. 

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1568586973/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Putting that nightmarish possibility aside, there's another question
that comes to mind (mine, anyway): Does arming Ukraine really make
Raytheon, Lockheed Martin, and their cohorts "defenders of democracy"? 

As someone who has followed Washington's arms production and its [global
weapons
sales](https://tomdispatch.com/america-dominant-again-in-arms-sales/)
for decades now, my answer would be: far from it. At best, those firms
are opportunists, selling their wares wherever they're allowed to,
regardless of whether their products will be used to push back a Russian
invasion of Ukraine or fuel the world's worst [humanitarian
catastrophe](https://www.unocha.org/yemen) of this century in Yemen. 

If they were truly to become part of an "arsenal of democracy," those
militarized mega-firms would have to trim their client lists
considerably. I suspect, in fact, that if we were looking at their
global sales in a more clear-eyed way, we would have to come up with a
more apt term for them entirely.  My own suggestion when it comes to
Boeing, Raytheon, General Dynamics, Lockheed Martin, and similar firms
would be "arsenal of autocracy." Let me explain why I think that term
would be all too apt.

**Missing News on the Weapons Trade**

U.S. weapons contractors aren't exactly fussy about which regimes they
send weapons to. Quite the contrary, they seek out as many sales to as
many places as the political market will bear.  Those companies also
devote considerable time, effort, and (of course) money to expanding
their potential markets. They do so in particular by
[lobbying](https://www.opensecrets.org/news/reports/capitalizing-on-conflict/defense-contractors)
to lower restrictions on where the U.S. government is willing to promote
weapons deals. 

Nowhere is the "arsenal of autocracy" moniker more apt than in the case
of the war in Yemen, where the United States has sold [tens of billions
](https://3ba8a190-62da-4c98-86d2-893079d87083.usrfiles.com/ugd/3ba8a1_aea25cfed2454ee1ad62f272334a105e.pdf)of
dollars of weaponry to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE)
for their grim intervention there.  The results have been horrific ---
[thousands of
civilians](https://apnews.com/article/middle-east-united-nations-yemen-houthis-bde67c6d3f0c3007410134e9f2963ad3)
killed by indiscriminate air strikes (using weaponry from those very
companies) and
[millions](https://reliefweb.int/report/yemen/yemen-complex-emergency-fact-sheet-6-fiscal-year-fy-2022)
on the brink of famine due to a Saudi-led air and sea
[blockade](https://www.fcnl.org/updates/2021-05/saudi-blockade-yemen-frequently-asked-questions)
that has dramatically reduced Yemeni imports of fuel and other essential
commodities.  At this moment, a rare two-month, United
Nations-negotiated
[truce](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-60962188) between the
Saudi-led coalition and the opposition Houthi rebels is about to end.
During that truce, air strikes have been limited, but sadly the blockade
has largely continued.  And there is a real danger that fighting may
resume on June 2nd, at which point U.S.-supplied weapons will once again
be the backbone of the Saudi war effort.

The impact of American arms in Yemen has been anything but abstract. 
Groups like the Yemen-based [Mwatana for Human
Rights](https://mwatana.org/en/us-weapons/), as well as [Amnesty
International](https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2022/01/yemen-us-made-weapon-used-in-air-strike-that-killed-scores-in-escalation-of-saudi-led-coalition-attacks/#:~:text=Amnesty%20International%20previously%20identified%20the,six%20civilians%20—%20including%20three%20children.)
and [Human Rights
Watch](https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/04/08/yemen-us-bombs-used-deadliest-market-strike),
have
[documented](https://static.wixstatic.com/ugd/fb6c59_bd62e10ae7b745069e9a6fa897de6a39.pdf)
the devastating role of bombs produced by Raytheon, General Dynamics,
and Lockheed Martin in air strikes that hit, among other civilian
targets, [a
marketplace](https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/04/08/yemen-us-bombs-used-deadliest-market-strike),
[a
wedding](https://www.cnn.com/interactive/2018/09/world/yemen-airstrikes-intl/),
and even [a school
bus](https://www.cnn.com/2018/08/17/middleeast/us-saudi-yemen-bus-strike-intl/index.html).
When Amnesty International [surveyed
](https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2019/09/arms-companies-must-be-held-accountable/)22
arms makers about their role in enabling these Saudi crimes, many of
them refused to answer, and those few that did offered variations on the
government-let-me-do-it explanation, seeming to suggest that
Washington's imprimatur absolved them of any responsibility. They also
cited customer confidentiality, as if that somehow justified
participating in the slaughter of innocents.

The response from Raytheon was a case in point: "Due to legal constraint
\[and\] customer relations issues... Raytheon does not provide
information on our products, customers or operational issues." As
Amnesty noted, Raytheon "went on to say that military and security
equipment is subject to a government review which includes
'consideration of international human rights and international law.'"

So much for defending democracy. In recent years, U.S. weapons have
flowed to other reckless, repressive regimes like the UAE, a
[partner-in-crime](https://3ba8a190-62da-4c98-86d2-893079d87083.usrfiles.com/ugd/3ba8a1_822cf3a2aaac41dd866f56f06e186715.pdf)
with Saudi Arabia in the war in Yemen, as well as a serial
[violator](https://apnews.com/article/turkey-north-africa-qatar-libya-united-arab-emirates-20a2ad9c585f40ec291585dbf8e9ed22)
of the United Nations arms embargo on parties in the civil war in Libya.
Other rogue regimes on the receiving end of U.S.-manufactured arms
include Egypt, where the government of President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi
has [jailed and tortured
](https://pomed.org/report-u-s-security-assistance-to-egypt-examining-the-return-on-investment/)human
rights and democracy advocates and [waged
](https://pomed.org/report-u-s-security-assistance-to-egypt-examining-the-return-on-investment/)a
scorched earth counterinsurgency campaign in the northern Sinai desert,
killing civilians and displacing tens of thousands of people; the
Philippines, where the regime of President Rodrigo Duterte
[killed](https://thehill.com/opinion/international/558658-congress-should-cut-military-aid-to-the-philippines/)
thousands under the guise of an anti-drug campaign, including
journalists, labor leaders, and land rights activists; and Nigeria,
whose military has become notorious for [killing and
torturing](https://www.cfr.org/blog/amnesty-international-and-nigerian-civilian-deaths-military-custody)
civilians.  And that's not an exhaustive list either.

In none of those cases have any executives in the American
weapons-making firms expressed the slightest qualms about their role in
fostering human rights abuses and fueling destabilizing, unnecessary
conflicts.  And don't hold your breath waiting for questions about such
cases the next time an arms industry official speaks to the media.

**The Dictators Lobby**

Even as arms industry executives take cover behind Washington's
decisions to weaponize repressive regimes, their companies are working
hard to bend the rules in their favor when it comes to who's eligible to
receive their products.  Over the past two decades, military firms have
[spent](https://www.opensecrets.org/news/reports/capitalizing-on-conflict/defense-contractors)
\$2.5 billion on their lobbying efforts while giving \$285 million in
campaign contributions to key members of Congress, according to Open
Secrets, a group devoted to promoting government transparency.  In an
average year, the industry employs around [700
lobbyists](https://quincyinst.org/report/pathways-to-pentagon-spending-reductions-removing-the-obstacles/),
or more than one for every congressional representative.

Such industry efforts to influence arms-sales policy are further
reinforced by lobbyists for foreign governments that want those
weapons.  As my Quincy Institute colleague Ben Freeman has
[noted](https://www.kcrw.com/news/shows/greater-la/lobbying-grocery-stores-oc/california-politicians-dictatorship-lobbyists),
Howard P. "Buck" McKeon, the former chair of the House Armed Services
Committee, has [worked
for](https://dawnmena.org/buck-mckeon-and-firm-made-over-2-million-lobbying-for-saudi-government/)
Saudi Arabia and Lockheed Martin, both of which have a strong interest
in pushing such weaponry out the door with as few questions asked as
possible.  [Democracy for the Arab World Now](https://dawnmena.org/)
(DAWN), [Freedom Forward](https://freedomforward.org/), and other
organizations promoting human rights and democracy in the Middle East
have placed operatives like McKeon who advocate for repressive regimes
in their "[lobbyist hall of
shame](https://dawnmena.org/countries/lobbyist-gallery/)." 

One well-documented case study of such lobbying from within the
government itself offers a glimpse into how the process works.  Charles
Faulkner, a former Raytheon lobbyist, came to serve as a member of the
State Department's Office of Legal Affairs during the Trump
administration.  In September 2018, he [pressed
](https://theintercept.com/2018/09/21/mike-pompeo-yemen-war-raytheon/)to
give Saudi Arabia a clean bill of health when it came to whether or not
it was intentionally targeting civilians in its Yemen air strikes.  He
won that argument, which laid the groundwork for a sale of Raytheon
precision-guided bombs to the Saudis to move forward.  Then, in the
spring of 2019, Faulkner sparked concern among lawmakers over his
apparent [role
](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/11/us/politics/democrats-charles-faulkner-arms-sales.html)in
crafting a plan to use emergency procedures to make an end run around
Congress when it came to a package of weaponry destined for Saudi
Arabia, the UAE, and Jordan.  

Detailed examples like that are hard to come by because the arms
industry does so much behind closed doors.  It's important to note,
however, that the weapons makers don't always win the day.  When
Raytheon's then-CEO Thomas Kennedy [showed
up](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/16/us/arms-deals-raytheon-yemen.html)
at the office of Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chair Robert
Menendez (D-NJ) to press him to lift a hold on a Raytheon deal with
Saudi Arabia, he was rebuffed.  Menendez [summarized
](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/16/us/arms-deals-raytheon-yemen.html)his
response to Kennedy this way to a *New York Times* reporter:

> "I told him I don't have an ideological problem; I have supported
> other arms sales.  But you cannot, as a company, be promoting the arms
> sales to a country that is using it in violation of international
> norms.  I understand the motivation for profit, but I don't understand
> the motivation for profit in the face of human rights violations and
> civilian casualties."

In short, lobbying doesn't always work, which is one reason the industry
puts so many resources into it.

 **Stemming the Flow of Arms to Autocracies**

Despite their lobbying power, weapons makers are facing significant
resistance to their efforts to keep the weapons flowing to regimes like
Saudi Arabia and the UAE.  During the Trump years, bipartisan majorities
voted to [end
](https://www.vox.com/2019/4/4/18293954/war-powers-resolution-passes-congress-yemen-bds)military
support for the Saudi armed forces under the War Powers Act and to[
block](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-saudi-arms/house-rejects-saudi-weapons-sales-trump-to-veto-idUSKCN1UC2US)
a sale of precision-guided bombs to the Kingdom, only to have those
measures vetoed by President Trump. 

Representatives Pramila Jayapal (D-WA) and Peter DeFazio (D-OR) will be
[introducing
](https://www.thenation.com/article/world/yemen-wars-power-resoultion/)a
new War Powers Resolution in hopes of changing the Biden
administration's policy of continuing to arm Saudi Arabia and the UAE.
In doing so, the president and his officials have
[ignored](https://www.vox.com/22881937/biden-saudi-arabia-mbs-khashoggi-yemen-human-rights)
their earlier criticisms of the Saudi regime and its de facto leader
Mohammed bin Salman who
[launched](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/18/world/middleeast/saudi-prince-yemen-emirates.html)
the war in Yemen in 2015 and was [implicated
](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/02/26/us-intelligence-concludes-saudi-crown-prince-mohammed-bin-salman-approved-killing-of-journalist-jamal-khashoggi-.html)in
the 2018 murder of Saudi journalist and U.S. resident Jamal Khashoggi.

There are also bills in the works to "[flip the
script](https://securityassistance.org/what-flipping-the-script-on-arms-sales-looks-like/)"
on arms-sales decision-making. These would require congressional
approval for major sales, thereby preempting the ability of the
president to veto efforts to block specific deals.  Such
[initiatives](https://www.forumarmstrade.org/congress2021_2022.html)
represent a high-water mark in Congressional efforts to restrict runaway
arms sales since the passage of the [Arms Export Control Act
](https://samm.dsca.mil/glossary/arms-export-control-act-aeca)in 1976,
more than four decades ago. Will they succeed in the Ukraine war moment
when the weapons industry is riding so high and proclaiming its good
deeds all too loudly? 

It's hard to say since this country has long been working to create and
support global arsenals of autocracy.  If the arms industry were truly
focused on "defending democracy" on this planet, its firms would have
already allowed the above-mentioned reforms to go through without
objection, or even, heaven forbid, supported them. The fact that they
won't do so tells you all you need to know about their true intentions
in what is for them a genuine [gold-rush
moment](https://tomdispatch.com/the-new-gold-rush/).

Copyright 2022 William Hartung

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

**William D. Hartung**, a [*TomDispatch
*](https://tomdispatch.com/the-new-gold-rush/)[regular](https://tomdispatch.com/the-new-gold-rush/),
is a Senior Research Fellow at the Quincy Institute for Responsible
Statecraft, and the author of [*Prophets of War: Lockheed Martin and the
Making of the Military Industrial
Complex*](https://www.amazon.com/Prophets-War-Lockheed-Military-Industrial-Complex/dp/1568586973).

Thanks to [https://tomdispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/) where this article originally appeared -- without the title image.
