# Letters to the editor

![](goya-letter.jpg){class="a"}

RE: [Three More Years: Reflections on Rudolf Steiner\'s Death Day](https://southerncrossreview.org/144/schwartz-death-day.html)

Dear Frank 

Our Brazilian Association of Waldorf Schools (FEWB) registered the mark
Waldorf School and is thinking on registering the brands
Anthroposophic School and Steiner School. I agree completely with it.
The problem is that many, but really many schools in Brazil were
adopting the name Waldorf School, but the only thing \-- exaggerating
\-- they had of Waldorf was a book by Steiner in their library. This
would pervert the idea of what a Waldorf school should be. One of the
main reasons that our Association does not recognize a school as being
Waldorf is that it has an owner, instead of being owned by an
educational non-profit association. (There are exceptions in case of
Kindergartens.) After a thorough process, a fairly Waldorf school is
accepted in the Association and is considered to be \"federated\". We
have hundreds of them. 

Waldemar Setzer

Sao Paulo, Brazil

[\*]{style="text-align:center"}

RE: [Reincarnation Blues -- Canto II](https://southerncrossreview.org/144/reincarnation-blues-2.html)

Frank,

 Nice---you need to find the melody and howl it! Or do you have it
already?

 Walter Alexander

I enjoyed this one, Frank. More Cantos to follow I hope.

Robert Zimmer

[\*]{style="text-align:center"}

RE: [A Contemporary Theological Anthropology of Two Jesus Children](https://southerncrossreview.org/144/diebel-2-jesus.html) by
Mark Diebel

Frank Thomas Smith,

Thank you for your Southern Cross Review and especially the special
attention you give to the understanding of Rudolph Steiner.  I have been
a student of Steiner since the sixties when my father and myself started
our Steiner Library. Some of these books have been out of print for
years and some were very difficult to obtain. I thought I had acquired
most of Steiner\'s works, but you have proved me wrong.  I truly enjoy
your articles about Steiner that are written by people who know what
they are talking about including yourself.  Steiner is not for
beginners; it took me several years to appreciate what he was actually
trying to communicate. Only by good fortune did my father\'s library
include an extensive collection of Edgar Cayce and Yogananda works along
with others too numerous to mention here that allowed me to more fully
absorb the complex spiritual concepts taught by Steiner. There are still
topics that confuse me to this day, like the Trinity and I am hoping
that you or the other writers that publish articles in the SCR will get
around to discussing them. Times are so different now; people are much
more open to the Steiner spiritual concepts.  Back in the 60\'s just a
belief in reincarnation could find you with a cross burning on your
front lawn.  I am so thankful for your SCR including the non-Steiner
articles.  I wish I had come across the SCR sooner, because lately I
feel like I am running out of time.  I hope that your readership grows,
and you continue to publish.

Gratefully,

Joe Anderson 

I am tired of the emphasis on"Christianity" Steiner brought us so much,
why is the focus so narrow?

Morgan Vierheller

[\*]{style="text-align:center"}

RE: [El Camino de Adrián hacia el Ingreso Básico Universal](https://southerncrossreview.org/144/adrians-way-esp.html)

El ingreso básico universal (i b u) es deseable, pero para que lo haya,
lo que se necesita para distribuir, debe ser producto del  P B I  de
cada país. Y cada país debiera considerar como política económica el
modo en que se logra ese producto bruto interno, de acuerdo a sus
propias decisiones en la forma de producir. Cada región tendría su
asociación (o asociaciones) para aprovechar lo mejor posible la materia
prima de cada una. La función jurídica consistiría en garantizar los
pactos entre individuos. El capital provendría de los componentes
sociales y el \"capitalista\" sería un administrador de ese capital
formado por fondos comunes, concediéndole el manejo y administración por
su demostrada capacidad. Aquí intervendría la Esfera de la
cultura-educación que debiera formar individuos con imaginación,
creatividad, yo no egoísta y con apertura de criterio y conocimiento del
mundo. Cada trabajador debe recibir el c b u por su trabajo, y más si es
eficiente y partícipe de la empresa a la cual podría aportar ideas para
beneficio de todos, siendo partícipes de reuniones mensuales. Borrar el
concepto de que cada quién vende su capacidad de trabajo al mejor postor
(esclavitud encubierta) y a su vez tratara de pagar menos por el
producido de otros.

Una vez cumplida su misión y por edad, enfermedad o muerte, el capital
quede sin administrador, como no fue de su propiedad tiene que pasar a
otro, sin tener que ver con la herencia familiar (no excluyente),

 Parte de lo producido deberá volcarse a lo cultural-educativo también a
modo de inversión, cuyo producto (jóvenes con yoes bien constituidos y
capacidad de pensar). Se integrará en la producción económica con
solvencia individual, moral y comprensión social. Al llegar la vejez el
capital es espiritual y se lo llama experiencia de vida. Pero aquí debe
prevalecer el inegoísmo también. Un anciano que haya trabajado con
otros, ha aprendido algo de cada ser con el que se haya vinculado, ya
sea niño (uno aprende mucho de ellos), jóvenes, pares, negociantes,
empleados, vendedores. Si este hoy anciano miró con profundo interés al
prójimo, bien lo sabe. Y la devolución del \"capital\" que recibió,
deberá volcarlo con todo amor a las otras generaciones.

Es más cómodo sentarse en una poltrona, pero debe prevalecer el
agradecimiento y la entrega a quien lo necesite.

 Elena Wedeltoft

Buenos Aires

[\*]{style="text-align:center"}

RE: [Adrian\'s Way to a Universal Basic Income](https://southerncrossreview.org/143/adrian-ubi.html)

Hello,

I read the article on UBI. Are you aware of Rudolf Steiner's true price
formula and that UBI is a dystopian idea that flies in the face of the
possibility an associative economy?

You might find this interesting: 
[https://www.tripartizione.it/articoli/MDTruePriceinPlaceofUnconditionalBasicIncome.pdf](https://www.tripartizione.it/articoli/MDTruePriceinPlaceofUnconditionalBasicIncome.pdf)

Best regards,

Xavier Andrillon

