# Killing Democracy in America
### The Military-Industrial Complex as a Cytokine Storm
## By [William J.  Astore](http://www.tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore)

The phrase "thinking about the unthinkable" has always been associated
with the [unthinkable
cataclysm](https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/a/herman-kahn/thinking-about-the-unthinkable/)
of a nuclear war, and rightly so. Lately, though, I've been pondering
another kind of unthinkable scenario, nearly as nightmarish (at least
for a democracy) as a thermonuclear Armageddon, but one that's been
rolling out in far slower motion: that America's war on terror never
ends because it's far more convenient for America's leaders to keep it
going \-- until, that is, it tears apart anything we ever imagined as
democracy.

I fear that it either can't or won't end because, as Martin Luther
King, Jr., [pointed
out](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176717/tomgram%3A_andrew_bacevich%2C_the_all-american_way/)
in 1967 during the Vietnam War, the United States remains the world's
[greatest
purveyor](https://fair.org/media-beat-column/the-martin-luther-king-you-dont-see-on-tv/)
of violence \-- and nothing in this century, the one he didn't live to
see, has faintly proved him wrong. Considered another way, Washington
should be classified as the planet's most committed arsonist,
regularly setting or fanning the flames of fires globally from Libya
to Iraq, Somalia to Afghanistan, Syria to \-- dare I say it \-- in
some quite imaginable future Iran, even as our leaders invariably
boast of having the world's greatest firefighters (also known as [the
U.S.
military](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175337/tomgram:_william_astore,_we're_number_one_(in_self-promotion)/)).

Scenarios of perpetual war haunt my thoughts. For a healthy democracy,
there should be few things more unthinkable than never-ending
conflict, that steady drip-drip of death and destruction that drives
[militarism](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176620/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_the_militarization_of_everything/),
reinforces authoritarianism, and facilitates [disaster
capitalism](https://www.thenation.com/article/archive/rise-disaster-capitalism/).
In 1795, James Madison
[warned](https://bracingviews.com/2013/06/28/no-nation-can-preserve-its-freedom-in-the-midst-of-continual-warfare/)
Americans that war of that sort would presage the slow death of
freedom and representative government. His prediction seems all too
relevant in a world in which, year after year, this country continues
to engage in needless wars that have nothing to do with national
defense.

#### You Wage War Long, You Wage It Wrong

To cite one example of needless war from the last century, consider
America's
[horrendous](https://bracingviews.com/2017/10/11/the-atrocious-nature-of-the-vietnam-war/)
years of fighting in Vietnam and a critical lesson drawn firsthand
from that conflict by reporter Jonathan Schell. "In Vietnam," [he
noted](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176722), "I learned about the
capacity of the human mind to build a model of experience that screens
out even very dramatic and obvious realities." As a young journalist
covering the war, Schell saw that the U.S. was losing, even as its
military was destroying startlingly large areas of South Vietnam in
the name of saving it from communism. Yet America's leaders, the
"[best and
brightest](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0449908704/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)"
of the era, almost to a man refused to see that all of what passed for
realism in their world, when it came to that war, was nothing short of
a first-class lie. 

Why? Because believing is seeing and they desperately wanted to
believe that they were the good guys, as well as the most powerful
guys on the planet. America was winning, it practically went without
saying, because it had to be. They were infected by their own version
of an all-American [victory
culture](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
blinded by a sense of this country's obvious destiny: to be the most
exceptional and exceptionally triumphant nation on this planet.

As it happened, it was far more difficult for grunts on the ground to
deny the reality of what was happening \-- that they were fighting and
dying in a senseless war. As a result, especially after the shock of
the enemy's Tet Offensive early in 1968, escalating protests within
the military (and among veterans at home) together with massive
antiwar demonstrations finally helped put the brakes on that war. Not
before, however, [more
than](https://bracingviews.com/2015/06/28/the-hidden-costs-of-war/)
58,000 American troops died, along with
[millions](https://www.alternet.org/2013/01/vietnam-war-memorial-vietnam-would-be-20-50-times-larger-ours/)
of Vietnamese, Cambodians, and Laotians.

In the end, the war in Indochina was arguably too costly, messy, and
futile to continue. But never underestimate the [military-industrial
complex](https://bracingviews.com/2016/10/08/greed-war-the-power-and-danger-of-the-military-industrial-complex/),
especially when it comes to editing or denying reality, while being
eternally over-funded for that very reality. It's a trait the complex
has shared with politicians of both parties. Don't forget, for
instance, the way President Ronald Reagan reedited that disastrous
conflict into a "[noble
cause](https://www.counterpunch.org/2016/09/14/america-in-vietnam-the-enduring-myth-of-the-noble-cause/)"
in the 1980s. And give him credit! That was no small thing to sell to
an American public that had already lived through such a war. By the
way, tell me something about that Reaganesque moment doesn't sound
vaguely familiar almost four decades later when our very own "[wartime
president](https://www.politico.com/news/2020/03/18/trump-administration-self-swab-coronavirus-tests-135590)"
long ago [declared
victory](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/18/us/politics/trump-coronavirus-response-failure-leadership.html)
in the "war" on Covid-19, even as the death toll from that virus
approaches 150,000 in the homeland.

In the meantime, the military-industrial complex has mastered the
[long
con](https://bracingviews.com/2019/04/30/the-pentagons-long-con/) of
the [no-win forever
war](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176487/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_the_pentagon_has_won_the_war_that_matters/)
in a genuinely impressive fashion. Consider the war in Afghanistan. In
2021 it will enter its third decade without an end in sight. Even when
President Trump makes
[noises](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/26/world/asia/afghanistan-troop-withdrawal-election-day.html)
about withdrawing troops from that country, Congress approves an
amendment to another massive, record-setting military budget with
broad [bipartisan
support](https://theintercept.com/2020/07/09/how-the-house-armed-services-committee-in-the-middle-of-a-pandemic-approved-a-huge-military-budget-and-more-war-in-afghanistan/)
that effectively obstructs any efforts to do so (while the Pentagon
continues to [bargain Trump
down](https://taskandpurpose.com/news/afghanistan-pullout-white-house)
on the subject). 

The Vietnam War, which was destroying the U.S. military, finally ended
in an ignominious withdrawal. Almost two decades later, after the 2001
invasion, the war in Afghanistan can now be \-- the dream of the
Vietnam era \-- fought in a \"limited\" fashion, at least from the
point of view of Congress, the Pentagon, and most Americans (who
ignore it), even if not the Afghans. The number of American troops
being killed is, at this point, [acceptably
low](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_military_casualties_in_the_War_in_Afghanistan),
almost imperceptible in fact (even if not to Americans who have lost
loved ones over there).

More and more, the U.S. military is relying on [air
power](https://news.yahoo.com/us-steps-deadly-airstrikes-during-090808450.html),
unmanned drones, mercenaries, local militias, paramilitaries, and
private contractors. Minimizing American casualties is an effective
way of minimizing negative media coverage here; so, too, are efforts
by the Trump administration to classify nearly everything related to
that war while [denying or
downplaying](https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/middle-east-civilian-deaths-have-soared-under-trump-and-the-media-mostly-shrug/2018/03/16/fc344968-2932-11e8-874b-d517e912f125_story.html)
\"[collateral
damage](https://bracingviews.com/2017/07/27/collateral-damage-a-terrifying-euphemism/)\"
\-- that is, dead civilians \-- from it.

Their efforts boil down to a harsh truth: America just plain [lies
about](https://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/afghan-war-plagued-by-mendacity-and-lies-inspector-general-tells-congress/2020/01/15/c65d0d46-37b5-11ea-bf30-ad313e4ec754_story.html)
its forever wars, so that it can keep on killing in lands far from
home.

When we as Americans refuse to take in the destruction we cause, we
come to passively accept the belief system of the ruling class that
what's still bizarrely called "defense" is a "must have" and that we
collectively must spend** **[significantly more
than](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176669/tomgram%3A_mandy_smithberger%2C_letting_the_pentagon_loose_with_your_tax_dollars)
a trillion dollars a year on the Pentagon, the Department of Homeland
Security, and a sprawling network of intelligence agencies, all
justified as necessary defenders of America's freedom. Rarely does the
public put much thought into the dangers inherent in a sprawling
"defense" network that increasingly invades and dominates our lives.  

Meanwhile, it's clear that [low-cost
wars](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176705/tomgram%3A_danny_sjursen%2C_the_end_of_war_as_we_know_it),
at least in terms of U.S. troops killed and wounded in action, can
essentially be prolonged indefinitely, even when they never result in
anything faintly like victory or fulfill any faintly useful American
goal. The Afghan War remains the case in point. "Progress" is a
concept that only ever fits [the
enemy](https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2020/05/the-trump-administration-is-now-hiding-information-about-taliban-attacks-in-afghanistan/)
\-- the Taliban continues to gain ground \-- yet, in these years,
figures like retired general and former CIA director David Petraeus
have continued to call for a
"[generational](https://bracingviews.com/2019/01/07/the-bankruptcy-of-conventional-wisdom-at-the-pentagon/)"
commitment of troops and resources there, akin to U.S. support for
South Korea. 

Who says the Pentagon leadership learned nothing from Vietnam? They
learned how to wage open-ended wars basically forever, which has
proved useful indeed when it comes to justifying and sustaining [epic
military
budgets](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176719/tomgram%3A_mandy_smithberger%2C_prioritizing_the_pentagon_in_a_pandemic/)
and the political authority that goes with them. But here's the thing:
in a democracy, if you wage war long, you wage it wrong. Athens and
the historian Thucydides learned this the hard way in the struggle
against Sparta more than two millennia ago. Why do we insist on
forgetting such an obvious lesson?

#### "We Have Met the Enemy and He Is Us"

World War II was arguably the last war Americans truly had to fight.
My Uncle Freddie was in the Army and stationed at Pearl Harbor when it
was attacked on December 7, 1941. The country then came together and
won a global conflict (with lots of help) in 44 months, emerging as
the planetary superpower to boot. Now, that superpower is very much on
the wane, as Donald Trump recognized in running successfully as a
[declinist
candidate](https://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176133/tomgram%3A_engelhardt,_has_the_american_age_of_decline_begun/)
for president in 2016. (Make America Great *Again*!) And yet, though
he ran against this country's forever wars and is now president, we're
approaching the third decade of a war on terror that has yielded
little, spread radical Islamic terror outfits across an expanse of the
planet, and still seemingly has no end.

"Great nations do not fight endless wars," Trump [himself
claimed](https://www.defensenews.com/congress/2019/02/06/great-nations-do-not-fight-endless-wars-trump-touts-troop-drawdowns-in-state-of-the-union/)
only last year. Yet that's exactly what this country has been doing,
regardless of which party ruled the roost in Washington. And here's
where, to give him credit, Trump actually had a certain insight.
America is no longer great precisely because of the endless wars we
wage and all the largely hidden but associated costs that go with
them, including the recently much publicized
[militarization](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176711/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_america%27s_forever_wars_have_come_home)
of the police here at home. Yet, in promising to make America great
again, President Trump [has
failed](https://www.antiwar.com/blog/2020/07/15/trumps-failed-promise-to-stop-americas-endless-wars/)
to end those wars, even as he's fed the military-industrial complex
with even greater piles of cash.

There's a twisted logic to all this. As the leading purveyor of
violence and terror, with its leaders committed to fighting Islamic
terrorism across the planet until the phenomenon is vanquished, the
U.S. inevitably becomes its own opponent, conducting a perpetual war
on itself. Of course, in the process, Afghans, Iraqis, Libyans,
Syrians, Somalis, and Yemenis, among other peoples on this embattled
planet of ours, pay big time, but Americans pay, too. (Have you even
noticed that high-speed railroad that's
[unbuilt](https://www.eesi.org/papers/view/fact-sheet-high-speed-rail-development-worldwide),
that dam in [increasing
disrepair](https://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/), those bridges
that need fixing, while money continues to
[pour](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176609/tomgram%3A_hartung_and_smithberger%2C_a_trillion-dollar_future_pentagon_budget)
into the national security state?) As the cartoon possum Pogo once so
classically
[said](http://www.thisdayinquotes.com/2011/04/we-have-met-enemy-and-he-is-us.html),
"We have met the enemy and he is us."

Early in the Iraq War, General Petraeus
[asked](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/tell-me-how-this-ends-pet_b_95673)
a question that was relevant indeed: "Tell me how this \[war\] ends."
The answer, obvious to so many who had
[protested](https://www.tomdispatch.com/post/414/signage_of_the_times)
in the global streets over the invasion to come in 2003, was "not
well." Today, another answer should be obvious: never, if the Pentagon
and America's political and national security elite have anything to
do with it. In thermodynamics class, I learned that a perpetual motion
machine is impossible to create due to entropy. The Pentagon never
took that in and has instead been hard at work proving that a
perpetual military machine is possible\... until, that is, the empire
it feeds off of collapses and takes us with it.

#### America's Military Complex as a Cytokine Storm

In the era of Covid-19, as cases and deaths from the pandemic continue
to [soar](https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/data/mortality) in America, it's
astonishing that military spending is also soaring to [record
levels](https://www.thebalance.com/u-s-military-budget-components-challenges-growth-3306320)
despite a medical emergency and a major recession. 

The reality is that, in the summer of 2020, America faces two deadly
viruses. The first is Covid-19. With hard work and some luck,
scientists may be able to mass-produce an effective vaccine for it,
perhaps by as early as [next
spring](https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/20/health/oxford-covid-19-vaccine-results-cansino-pfizer-study/index.html).
In the meantime, scientists do have a sense of how to control it,
contain it, even neutralize it, as countries from South Korea and New
Zealand to Denmark have shown, even if some Americans, encouraged by
our president, insist on throwing all caution to the winds in the name
of living free. The second virus, however, could prove even more
difficult to control, contain, and neutralize: forever war, a pandemic
that U.S. military forces, with their global strike missions, continue
to spread across the globe.

Sadly, it's a reasonable bet that in the long run, even with Donald
Trump as president, America has a better chance of defeating Covid-19
than the virus of forever war. At least, the first is generally seen
as a serious threat (even [if
not](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/18/us/politics/trump-coronavirus-response-failure-leadership.html)
by a president blind to anything but his chances for reelection); the
second is, however, still largely seen as evidence of our strength and
exceptionalism. Indeed, Americans tend to imagine \"our\" military not
as a dangerous virus but as a set of benevolent antibodies, defending
us from global evildoers. 

When it comes to America's many wars, perhaps there's something to be
learned from the way certain people\'s immune systems respond to
Covid-19. In some cases, the virus sparks an exaggerated immune
response that drives the body into a severe inflammatory state known
as a [cytokine
storm](https://www.today.com/health/what-cytokine-storm-exaggerated-immune-system-response-coronavirus-covid-19-t179072).
That \"storm\" can lead to multiple organ failure followed by death,
yet it occurs in the cause of defending the body from a viral attack.

In a similar fashion, America\'s exaggerated response to 19 hijackers
on 9/11 and then to perceived threats around the globe, especially the
nebulous threat of terror, has led to an analogous (if little noticed)
cytokine storm in the American system. Military (and [militarized
police](https://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176711/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_america%27s_forever_wars_have_come_home/))
antibodies have been sapping our resources, inflaming our body
politic, and slowly strangling the vital organs of democracy. Left
unchecked, this \"storm\" of inflammatory
[militarism](https://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176583/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_drowning_in_militarism/)
will be the death of democracy in America.

To put this country right, what's needed is not only an effective
vaccine for Covid-19 but a way to control the \"antibodies\" produced
by America's forever wars abroad and, as the years have gone by, at
home \-- and the ways they've attacked and inflamed the collective
U.S. political, social, and economic body. Only when we find ways to
vaccinate ourselves against the destructive violence of those wars,
whether on foreign streets or our own, can we begin to heal as a
democratic society.

To survive, the human body needs a healthy immune system, so when it
goes haywire, becomes wildly inflamed, and ends up attacking and
degrading our vital organs, we're in trouble deep. It's a reasonable
guess that, in analogous terms, American democracy is already on a
ventilator and beginning to feel the effects of multiple organ
failure.

Unlike a human patient, doctors can't put our democracy into a
medically induced coma. But collectively we should be working to
suppress our overactive immune system before it kills us. In other
words, it's truly time to
[defund](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176723/tomgram%3A_william_hartung%2C_what_makes_us_safer/)
that military machine of ours, as well as the militarized version of
the police, and rethink how actual threats can be neutralized without
turning every response into an endless war.

So many years later, it\'s time to think the unthinkable. For the U.S.
government that means \-- gasp! \-- peace. Such a peace would start
with imperial retrenchment (bring our troops home!), much reduced
military (and police) budgets, and [complete
withdrawal](https://bracingviews.com/2017/04/30/the-only-way-to-win-americas-wars-is-to-end-them/)
from Afghanistan and any other place associated with that
"generational" war on terror. The alternative is a cytokine storm that
will, in the end, tear us apart from within.

*William Astore, a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel, taught
history for 15 years. A
*[TomDispatch](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176711/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_america%27s_forever_wars_have_come_home)[*
regular*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176711/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_america%27s_forever_wars_have_come_home)*,
he also has a personal blog,* [Bracing
Views](https://bracingviews.com/)*.*

*Follow *TomDispatch* on
*[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and join us on
*[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check out the
newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new dystopian novel (the second
in the Splinterlands series)
*[Frostlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
Beverly Gologorsky\'s novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),*
and Tom Engelhardt\'s *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy\'s *[In the Shadows of the American Century:
The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*
and John Dower\'s *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since
World War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

Copyright 2020 William J. Astore

Thanks to \<a
href="[http://tomdispatch.com](http://tomdispatch.com/)"\> Tom
Dispatch.com. \</a\>
