# What is the Human Being?

![Image of a human's head sillouete made out of green leaves with some brown and yellow leaves falling of](human-head-2.jpg)

## by Judith von Halle

### Excerpt from her her book *Dementia - Anthroposophical Perspectives* \*

Knowledge about the human being, his true inner and outer nature,
can be acquired if one begins to consider him – which is, after
all, his *own* being – with the methods of anthroposophical
spiritual science. Practicing anthroposophical spiritual science
is possible for *everyone.* No special qualifications are needed.
By being human one is qualified. For it is not at all the task of
anthroposophical spiritual science to investigate the spirit, but
by means of the spirit to investigate the world and humanity. The
fact that this spirit is available to the human being means that
we are – without any kind of specialized training – very well
equipped for anthroposophical investigative work, provided that we
are really willing to do so.

Surely we can advance to higher knowledge with anthroposophical
spiritual science, as is the case with every scientific activity.
But anthroposophical spiritual science can be practiced by
everyone, because it embraces every imaginable field in which one
can be interested, and it always begins with what everyone – also
those not scientifically trained – can do: *observe*. The precise
observation of all the phenomena and events without hasty judgment
about what is being observed is the prerequisite for all serious
scientific work.

Everyone can practice observing the surrounding objects and
events, starting by observing the small, most familiar things,
from the processes of growth and decay in a flower to phenomena to
which one has not yet been confronted, such as the progression of
illness in a dementia patient. Both, the apparently longtime
familiar as well as what has never been seen before, demand close
attention from us, for when we quietly observe a long familiar
process without the usual hasty evaluation or judgment, we will
discover much that we were previously unaware of; it will be like
a completely unknown phenomenon.

By means of such exact observing, when we try to curb all the
hasty (clever) knowing about what is being observed, suddenly
connections will be evident which make clear to us that all
observed objects and events are subject to constant change,
whether slow or rapid, which, although invisible, does exist and
must be permeated with processes and forces. Gradually we come to
the certainty that alongside our familiar visible, *earthly* world
another, invisible *spiritual* world must exist from which these
actions and forces emanate – as for example the stimulus which
lets the plant grow and decay; or that invisible but undeniably
existent and intense feeling of love, or also of loathing.

Only by carrying out such simple but earnest observation exercises
will we recognize this spiritual world as omnipresent, for it is
what permeates our material, visible outer world. And we will
recognize that everything we perceive of the external world with
our sensory organs is vivified by it.

Therefore, anthroposophical spiritual science takes on the task of
first observing the essence of the world and of the human being,
just as they are, namely in their outer nature and their inner
spiritual relationships, and then to fathom them. Anthroposophical
spiritual science investigates the same things as do natural
science, only not in a “test tube”, but by means of refined
spiritual perception.

For an in-depth investigation of the relationships between the
outer world and the spiritual world, however, other organs of
perception than the sensory ones are needed. Simple exercises,
such as the already mentioned observation exercise, lead to the
gradual training of such supersensible organs through what takes
place in the soul by means of pure observation.[<sup id="1u">1</sup>](#1d) It is
worth mentioning that the development of supersensible organs,
according to equally clear rules, occurs as does the development
of sensory organs. The disclosures resulting from the use of
supersensible organs are also to be compared with each other as
are the results and disclosures which we make through the use of
our sensory organs. Just as two rational persons would not argue
as to whether the sky as a rule is blue and not green, so would
two persons with supersensible organs not argue about whether
there are body-free, living beings in the supersensible world, to
which human beings also belong when they are body-free in the time
between death and a new birth and are living in the spiritual
world.

When we consider the human being from the anthroposophical point
of view, a certain discrepancy arises with the approach of many
natural scientists; for anthroposophical spiritual science
contemplates the human being as a *spiritual* being. This
spiritual being has its home in the spiritual world and unites
itself, through incarnation, with the physical body, which serves
as an instrument to live in the physical material world and to
work in it, beginning in the womb after conception. Therefore the
human being is a part of this spiritual world and remains one
after he is born. We can say that the earthly human being is at
least as much a spiritual being as a physical one; in reality the
ratio is three to one. For whoever investigates and describes the
human being in a spiritual-scientific way will come to the
conclusion that he consists of four different components of being,
only one of which is the physical-material body that we see in the
mirror.

At first we have the familiar material, physical body that we can
feel and touch. It contains our organs, which can degenerate when
affected by an illness and may be treated by means of surgery.
Only this material body has taken on the same characteristics as
the mineral kingdom. It is matter which – had it not been
permeated with something completely different – would be as rigid
and lifeless as a stone. But the human being possesses, besides
this physical body, one which in anthroposophical spiritual
science is called the “life-body” or “etheric-body”. This body,
invisible to the sensory organs, works as a spiritual, vivifying
force into the organs of the physical body and makes them
functional. We possess this life-body, or etheric-body, in common
with the vegetable kingdom. Plants also have a material body which
we can touch as we do a stone, but they grow and bloom and then
wither. A force of an “etheric” nature acts in them, which
vivifies the dead material. But the human being has, in addition
to the physical and etheric bodies, another component of his
being, namely what we usually call the “soul”. This component,
which in anthroposophical terminology is called the “astral-body”,
basically works in the nervous system, bringing forth the feelings
which we sense within us and which we all too often allow to lead
us. With this component we stand at the stage of the animal
kingdom. Animals, in contrast to plants, have the astral-body as
their highest component. They have feelings which they can
express. But finally the human being possesses still a fourth
element, which raises him above the animal kingdom: it is the
“I”.[<sup id="2u">2</sup>](#2d) Through the I, the human being has a clear
consciousness of Self; he is able to apprehend himself and the
world in thought. One can also call this I the “spirit”. We are
concerned with this spirit when we grapple with dementia, because
the word dementia includes the word spirit (“mens”).

> > > > *Physical body:            Visible component*
> > > > 
> > > >   
> > > > 
> > > > *Etheric body:               Invisible spiritual component*
> > > > 
> > > > *Astral body                  Invisible spiritual component*
> > > > 
> > > > *The I*                            Invisible spiritual component

Medical science today is feverishly occupied with seeking a
treatment for dementia and also for its causes. Admittedly some
small successes have been achieved with the discovery of means
which delay the degenerative process of dementia, but in fact,
with the help of conventional medicinal and natural scientific
procedures, we have neither discovered exactly what triggers this
illness nor how it can be treated. The degenerative processes are
studied, but even when the material processes can be exactly
described, the question of “why” remains. Incidentally, this also
applies to most illnesses, above all the incurable ones. Why does
a cell degenerate and cancer develop? Of course there are risk
factors, but people die of cancer although none of the risk
factors apply to them. Why does one person catch influenza when
another, who had the same close contacts, does not? Why does it
break out in one person on a certain day and in another not? The
“hardline” natural scientists would answer that this depends upon
certain material preconditions. But then we could again ask: Why
do such preconditions apply on that particular day?

In respect to such questions about the “why”, we might remember a
typical scene in physics class during our school days when the
revolutions of the planets around the sun were explained using
objects swimming in water that are put in motion using a stick or
a spoon. That depiction of centrifugal force can appear to be very
illuminating, but who, some naïve (in the best sense) pupils might
be inclined to ask, is responsible for the impulse in planetary
space? Who holds the stick or the spoon? Many teachers point to
the so-called “big bang”, and pupils may prefer to be silent when
the question arises in them again: Who is responsible for the big
bang? Therefore it isn’t strange that the greatest natural
scientists, above all physicists, finally reach for the concept of
God. This concept of God is only revealed when one recognizes the
invisible *spirit* as the cause of material phenomena.

Whoever arrives at an enhanced and therewith accurate envisioning
of the human being such as spiritual science makes possible, will
quickly see the plausibility of also keeping the spiritual
relationships in mind when evaluating physical phenomena. It has
been shown that the scientists who understand the human being as
the product of a “randomly determined gene-lottery”[<sup id="3u">3</sup>](#3d) and instead of the psycho-spiritual nature of humanity define
material degeneration as caused by randomness, can hardly arrive
at the causes of illnesses such as dementia. If the spiritual
components of the person are not taken into consideration, finding
the causes of illness is hardly imaginable; one can only treat the
symptoms, which does not lead to a cure. Many orthodox methods,
based on a distorted image of man, only achieve a *suppression* of
the symptoms. This word is appropriate for the process that takes
place in the patient when he is treated with such means. For in
fact what the illness wants to express is sup*pressed*, pressed
downward. The essence of the illness, its cause, also its
spiritual reason and purpose, instead of being treated is
suppressed into the deeper layers of the human being, and the
destiny or karma which should have been fulfilled by this illness
is pushed forward to a later point in time, perhaps even to a
future incarnation. Naturally such a suppressed illness will find
expression at the next opportunity in a much more sever way.

Recognition of the spirit in the human being and the universe is,
however, quite difficult for our contemporary culture. Whoever
speaks of such things will often only be laughed at by the wise
men of science. In this respect there is a simple, everyday
observable example to show how the spirit vivifies matter and that
matter could never exist without the spirit: it is death. With
nothing else can the real impulse of the spirit be so graphically
illustrated. Every day someone in our direct proximity abandons
his or her physical body. Whoever has stood at a deathbed will
have witnessed this great moment: The human being whom we knew
abandons his bodily dwelling. Here it becomes very clear to us
that we had not loved the physical person, but that the physical
body of this person was really only the earthly appearance that
the real person had assumed; and now the mere physical component
lies in the deathbed, but it is no longer the true human being.
The true human being, namely the spiritual one, has gone to
another place, to another world in which he needs no physical
body. Basically, everyone should be able to understand this: when
the person’s spirit is present in the physical body it permeates
it, works in it so that the physical body can walk around. If the
spirit is removed from the physical instrument, it lies unmoving
and rigid.

We can make a similar observation with a sleeping person. When
asleep the spirit and the soul, that is, the I and the
astral-body, leave the physical body and move to the spiritual
world. The life-body, however, remains united with the physical
component, for the organic functions remain unaffected during
sleep. Nevertheless, when the person’s spirit is in the spiritual
world while sleeping, he cannot move around, he only lies in bed.
As soon as the spirit is brought back again into the physical
component, he can again rise and guide his limbs around the room.
When the human being passes through the gates of death, his spirit
does not return to the bodily component. But he does not
disappear. He lives in his true spiritual home, until one day he
returns in a new incarnation and acquires a new physical body.
This thought explains the secret of the Christ-impulse. “I am the
resurrection and the life,” Christ tells Martha.[<sup id="4u">4</sup>](#4d) Christ is the “I AM”, which is given to each of us. This I, the
fourth component of being, is the spiritual in man; it is our
actual individuality, and this actual individuality is not
decomposable, it is immortal. Consequently the I is the
“resurrection”, for it overcomes death in that it rises out of the
decomposing material body and enters its spiritual home undamaged,
and that is “the life”.

Therefore the human being is a spiritual being who during his
earthly sojourn resides in a material body, which has been built
by higher spiritual beings.[<sup id="5u">5</sup>](#5d) When one regards man as the being which he really is, namely consisting of four different
components, it is then possible to speak anthropologically about
this being, even if one has completed no medical studies. By means
of anthroposophical spiritual science, for example, knowledge of
the physical nature of the human being can be acquired without
dissecting his body.

By means of the example of the sleeping state, we can observe that
man’s components of being can pass through various stages so that
the whole person is “mobile”. Also in the case of an illness the
various human components are in movement; something exceptional is
happening to him. If we recognize that the human being is
permeated and thereby strengthened with spiritual impulses, then
we have achieved a real scientific contribution to the knowledge
of man. On the other hand, we can understand why orthodox
medicine, despite all its achievements contributing to human
wellbeing, does not advance in many aspects and is unable to
answer many questions about the causes of illnesses. But if we
approach the true causes of illnesses, in many cases treatment
would not have to remain at the stage of treating symptoms.

Given that man is a *spiritual* being with a physical body, it is
obvious that the causes of an illness are not to be found in the
physical context, but rather the physical breakdown is recognized
as the impulse of spiritual causes and these causes are to be
sought within the spiritual components of the human being.

1. [&#8593;](#1u) <span lang="en-US" id="1d">See Rudolf Steiner: </span><span
    lang="en-US">*How to Know Higher Worlds*</span><span
    lang="en-US"> – Anthroposophic Press (GA 10).</span>

2. [&#8593;](#2u) <span lang="en-US" id="2d">The “I” should not to be confused with the
    “ego”. What the ego attempts, in contrast to the I, is to make
    one's own drives and wishes prevail. It is completely
    concentrated on itself and not on the world and on the other
    person. In fact, the ego is our unpurified astral body. The I
    should dominate </span><span lang="en-US">this ego, and not
    the contrary, the ego dominate the I.</span>

3. [&#8593;](#3u) <span lang="en-US" id="3d">Prof. Hubert Marl, former president of the Max Plank Institute, in Der Spiegel, Dec. 15, 2000: (“The popular
    arguments in philosophical and para-philosophical debate about
    what is “natural” and “unnatural” often lack a sound basis.
    For example, it is claimed that a person not originated by a
    randomly determined gene-lottery would lose his freedom and
    therewith a substantial part of his human dignity….”)</span>

4. [&#8593;](#4u) <span lang="en-US" id="4d">Gospel of John, Chap. 11, 25.</span>


\*Available from
[Amazon](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Dementia-Anthroposophical-Perspectives-Judith-Halle/dp/1906999740)
and/or [Temple Lodge
Publishing](http://www.templelodge.com/pages/viewbook.php?isbn_in=9781906999742)

Translated from the German by Frank Thomas Smith
