# The Inward Gaze of Hermann Hesse

![Siddhartha](siddhartha.jpg){class="alarge"}Siddhartha

## by M. M. Owen

In 1963*,* Timothy Leary, the high priest of LSD, anointed a German
author, Hermann Hesse, the 'poet of the interior journey'. Hesse had
died a year earlier, at the age of 85. But the novels he left behind,
Leary declared in *The Psychedelic Review*, were a 'priceless manual'
for navigating the acid trip.

Literature is full of weird afterlives. Franz Kafka died in 1924
believing that his manuscripts would be burnt. Herman Melville's
*Moby-Dick* (1851) was originally a flop. But the 1960s embrace of Hesse
ranks with the weirdest of them all. He never visited the United States.
He didn't speak *English*. His only drug was red wine. But by 1968, as
*Der Spiegel* observed, the hippies had pulled this fading writer 'out
of the doldrums'. Hesse went on to become the bestselling German author
of the 20th century, and sits below only the Brothers Grimm and Karl
Marx as the most translated German writer of recent decades.

Hesse's work was attuned to a youth culture animated by an amorphous
desire for a breakthrough in consciousness precisely because such a
desire gripped him throughout his entire life. Many of us are familiar
with this desire; it animates almost every young person, in one way or
another. But managing it wisely can be a challenge, and Hesse, in his
life and work, constitutes a study in the double-edged sword of dwelling
on one's inner worlds.

Hermann Karl Hesse was born in 1877 in Calw, a pretty town on the edge
of Germany's Black Forest. His family were devout Pietists, devoted to
the study of the Bible and the Christian life. His father published
books with titles such as *The Heathens and Us*.

Hesse had a grim adolescence. His mother deemed his early poems 'poison'
because, she felt, they displayed an interest in the sinful world of
man, rather than God. His teachers, judging him to be 'full of febrile
thoughts and excessive emotions', were severe. He kept running away from
school and began threatening to find a revolver and shoot himself. At
14, he was committed to an asylum. A loathing of institutions, as well
as a profound emotional turbulence, would stay with Hesse throughout his
life.

> And so long as you haven't experienced\
> This: to die and so to grow,\
> You are only a troubled guest\
> On the dark earth.

So wrote Johann Wolfgang von Goethe -- Germany's William Shakespeare,
and Hesse's first literary idol. As a young author, Hesse was drawn to
Goethe's focus on the interior life and Romanticism's focus on 'the
secret wellsprings of the soul'. He was also 'enthralled by Nietzsche'
and his concept of the *Übermensch* -- the being who could embrace the
death of God and thrive in pure self-directedness. Foreshadowing the
hippies, Hesse wondered if spiritual renewal might emerge out of the
ancient mists of the East. He pored over the Buddha's dissections of
human consciousness, and the gnomic wisdom of Lao Tzu. By 1900, at the
age of 23, Hesse had firmly arrived at what he regarded as the path to
psychic flourishing: 'greater profundity through internalization'.

*Life's problems aren't there to be cleanly solved*, Jung had explained

In 1916 -- after avoiding the First World War's trenches thanks to his
poor eyesight -- Hesse met Josef Bernhard Lang, a psychoanalyst and
devotee of Carl Jung. Lang was something of an oddball, with his own
significant psychological issues and a penchant for astrology and the
occult. But the two men became friends; over the following decades, they
wrote countless letters to one another. Through Lang, Hesse took to
Jung's theories immediately. He liked Jung's focus on a web of inner
symbols forged in childhood, and his notion of a submerged realm of the
personality called 'the shadow'. Shortly after discovering Jung, in a
letter, Hesse reiterated his outlook on life: 'my sole interest is in
the internal'.

Hesse's influences shared a belief in the power of individual
subjectivity. This gave him a singular, unwavering focus that remained
unchanged over decades of novels: the self. More accurately, Hermann
Hesse's self. The author liked to refer to his novels as 'soul
biographies'. Writing, he declared, was 'a long, varied, and tortuous
route, whose aim is to express the personality of the artist's Self',
until that Self is 'ultimately unwrapped and laid bare, ransacked and
all spent'.

Hesse's abiding core theme means that his novels have a repetitive
pattern. All of them feature a male protagonist whose overflowing self
is at odds with the dull, workaday expectations of mainstream society.
All have encounters with one or more wise sages. They become isolated
and are impelled to embark on journeys of self-discovery -- journeys
that require them to confront the conflicts embedded deep in their
psyches. The forces fighting these conflicts always have the thick air
of Jungian archetypes. In *Steppenwolf* (1927), one of Hesse's most-read
novels, the protagonist's inner life 'oscillates, as everyone's does,
not merely between two poles, such as the body and the spirit, the saint
and the sinner, but between thousands'.

In 1921, Hesse underwent two spells of therapy with Jung himself. In his
diary, he recorded some advice that the renowned analyst gave him.
Life's problems aren't there to be cleanly solved, Jung had explained;
each of them is 'a pair of opposites, that between them produce a
tension that is called life'. This tempting, elusive bit of wisdom is
what all of Hesse's protagonists discover, and then attempt to
integrate. By dwelling on the totality of their inner worlds intensely
enough and for long enough, they move toward the promised land of what
is called 'self-realisation' in Hesse's earlier novel *Demian* (1919).
They can finally see themselves -- *all* of themselves. As a result,
they understand how to live.

Even if you've never read a word of his novels, the appeal of Hesse to
1960s readers should be obvious. He loathed teachers and the rat race,
he liked nudism and trees. But it's more than that: to Hesse, as the
scholar Ingo Cornils
[writes](https://boydellandbrewer.com/a-companion-to-the-works-of-hermann-hesse.html),
'the individual self' was 'the repository of the divine and the only
institution we are accountable to'. Hesse's novels hold out the very
1960s promise that, by shunning social injunctions and dedicating
ourselves to vivid inner explorations, we can break through to a psychic
rebirth. The plots of his novels often climax with the protagonist
experiencing a searing and hallucinogenic metamorphosis -- much like the
one that Leary wanted to extend to all Americans, via the acid tab.

*Demian* tells the story of a young man, Emil Sinclair, who drops out of
mainstream society. Inspired by the enigmatic musings of the sagelike
Max Demian, he attempts to throw off bourgeois values and uncover a path
to self-realisation. His search takes him through various forms of
psychological mysticism. A recent Penguin
[edition](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/299804/demian-by-hermann-hesse/)
of *Demian* features a foreword by the actor James Franco, who recalls
dropping out of university aged 19 to pursue his dream of acting. Amid
doubts, *Demian* assured Franco that he had taken 'another step away
from a conformist life' and towards 'a life that resonated with my
ideals'.

Over the decades, *Demian* has had a similar animating effect on
countless other readers. Sinclair is inspired by Demian to reject 'the
herd instinct' and be 'utterly faithful to the active seed of nature
within him'. Keeping this faith requires that Sinclair reject all that
has come before, and pull a dazzling, Nietzschean new thing out of the
fire. Every great artistic mind is touched by this urge. It is easy to
see why many heroes of the counterculture (including the guitarist
Carlos Santana) read *Demian* as a manifesto.

In *Siddhartha* (1922) -- one of the most popular novels ever written
about Buddhism -- the eponymous protagonist seeks an enlightened way of
life. Wandering through ancient India, he experiments with both spartan
asceticism and luxurious hedonism. Eventually, he finds spiritual wisdom
by contemplating the flow of a great river. *Siddhartha* is gentler than
*Demian*, but it carries the same spirit. Pursuing enlightenment,
Siddhartha cannot even submit to the teachings of the Buddha himself.
'Wisdom,' he says, 'is not communicable'; it is only discoverable. 'A
true seeker,' he declares, 'could not accept any teachings.'
Siddhartha's restless seeking ends when the flow of the river reveals to
him that -- behind the veil of Maya, behind the illusory nature of all
dualities -- there exists a 'unity of all things'.

*Siddhartha* has sent who knows how many backpackers to India. I have a
sharp memory of reading the novel's final chapters while sunset waned
over a beach in Kerala. The mosquitoes were eating me alive but I needed
to know how Siddhartha had done it. (I liked the idea that the hedonism
could be enlightening, and was less keen on the asceticism thing.)
Barely out of my teens, mine was the same urge as the counterculture's:
to uncover some transcendent and technicolour truth that everyone else
was too lifeless to care about, and have it set my soul ablaze.

Down in the weird waters of consciousness, it is only ourselves who can
go wading through our selves

Hesse is not a great stylist. His prose is plain. His novels are
ponderous, thinly plotted, often didactic, occasionally corny, and
entirely without humour. But none of this really matters, because what
has drawn decades of readers to Hesse is not his writing, but his
advocacy of the self-realisation project. The idea that Hesse's books
are a manual for inner discovery has long been their core appeal -- an
appeal that means his novels persist as half literature, and half
self-help. Yes, you will still find Hesse on the shelves of many a
refined bookstore, a row or two below his hero, Goethe. But you will
also find him mixed in with Paulo Coelho and Kahlil Gibran in those
small and incense-dim bookshops where you headbutt a dreamcatcher while
trying to find some cash in your pocket.

In their best moments, Hesse's novels contain glimpses of real wisdom.
For example: he perceived, accurately, that most of us stumble from
adolescence into adulthood in possession of selves that are half-formed,
unexamined and buffeted by the winds of the world. Though nowadays
Jungian analysis carries a pungent whiff of pseudoscience, the inner
chambers of the self remain a place where the searchlight of science
begins to dim and flicker. Down in the weird waters of consciousness, it
is only ourselves who can go wading through our selves. Hesse
communicated clearly the value of sharpening our powers of
self-perception. And his unwavering commitment to the individual mind,
all forms of collectivism be damned, inoculated him against both the
'phony-patriotic psychosis' of the First World War, and 'that stupid ass
Hitler'.

Perhaps, above all, Hesse's preoccupation with the shadow remains
valuable. In *Steppenwolf*, the protagonist Harry Haller is drawn to the
comforts of a bourgeois existence. But he also loathes 'this carefully
preserved optimism of the middle classes, this fat and prosperous brood
of mediocrity'. Alienated from society and suicidally dejected, Haller
begins to accept those parts of himself that, previously, he couldn't
bring himself to examine. His bitterness starts to fade. This journey
mirrors that of all Hesse protagonists. Whenever they manage a psychic
breakthrough, it results from confronting, unflinchingly, their shadow
-- those corners of their being that are dark, shameful and cruel.

Much modern self-improvement comes down to various forms of pampering,
but Hesse's novels remind us that the real work involves squaring up to
the bits of ourselves that we want to ignore. 'When we hate someone we
are hating something that is within ourselves, in his image,' reads a
line in *Demian*. Every Hesse protagonist learns the truth that knowing
thyself can sting.

And yet, the legacy of Hesse's unwavering self-regard reveals the very
thing that his characters dedicate their lives to demolishing: a
duality. There exists a long and circular debate over whether a person's
ideas can be divorced from how they lived. For most non-academic
readers, they can't, or at least not fully. It matters that Jean-Jacques
Rousseau tried to teach readers about compassion, having abandoned his
five children to an orphanage. It matters that George Orwell wrote about
the dangers of totalitarianism, and then went to Spain to fight fascism
with his own two hands. And in the case of an author who dedicated his
career to penning a string of 'soul biographies', it seems reasonable to
ask: did those thousands of hours of intense self-scrutiny yield some
sort of significant change in that author's real life?

Unfortunately, what Hesse's biographer Gunnar Decker
[described](https://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674737884)
as the author's 'boundless egotism' never waned. A large proportion of
Hesse's letters are occupied by entitled ruminations and a pervasive
short-temperedness. According to Decker in *Hesse: The Wanderer and His
Shadow* (2018), Hesse was often 'unable to stand anyone being near him'.
Any time a practical thing was required of him, it registered with Hesse
as an imposition from a mediocre world that was forever trying to thwart
the pressing task of his self-realisation. Hesse headed off for a
weeks-long 'rest cure' every year, regardless of whether the people in
his life could have used his help. He railed against material trappings,
but constantly tapped up his Swiss patrons to help pay the bills.

Hesse's treatment of the people who cared about him was consistently
callous. A few weeks after the birth of his third son, he was on a
passenger liner bound for the Orient, off to pursue self-realisation
while his stressed, depressed wife took care of the newborn. Hesse was
so perpetually irritated by his third wife that they communicated via
'house-letters' so that the silence of the author's study was never
disturbed. Hesse's constant gaslighting, angry outbursts and moody
silences helped tip her toward suicidal depression. In the mid-1940s,
Hesse bombarded his publisher, Peter Suhrkamp, with complaints about
delays. Suhrkamp had a decent excuse for the delays: following 10 months
in concentration camps, he was suffering from repeated paralysis of both
his legs and from recurrent bouts of pneumonia. But speaking of the
artistic doubts that had been plaguing him in his rural corner of
war-less Switzerland, Hesse told Suhrkamp that 'you can have no idea of
the hell that I have been living in'.

Hesse's growth was a sort of mirror. It never cared to engage the wider
world

I know it can register as a bit unseemly, this picking over a man's
private conduct, long after he has died. This isn't meant as some cheap
call-out. Hesse is hardly the first artist to be guilty of narcissism or
immaturity. He is certainly not the first man to mistreat the women in
his life. And he likely possessed what we would today classify as some
form of bipolar disorder.

But the record of Hesse's conduct in the world begs the question: what
was it all for? Generations of readers have been fired up by his
conviction that we need to examine our inner selves, and evolve, and
transform. However, Hesse seems to have remained remarkably unchanged
throughout his entire adult life. A self-obsessed curmudgeon in 1900; a
self-obsessed curmudgeon in 1960. A person can be however he wants, but
this is an author who had essentially one theme: personal growth.

For Hesse, this growth doesn't appear to have conferred on him any
responsibilities to the wider world. Indeed, though his individualism
shielded his mind from the pull of Nazi groupthink, it also didn't
inspire him to any acts of resistance. Through the years of butchering,
Hesse cultivated a 'politics of detachment'. He made some careful
gestures, such as reviewing Jewish authors. But his actions were timid
enough that his novels evaded the Reich censors until 1943. Fellow
German authors condemned Hesse for refusing to openly criticise the
Nazis, and for seeing out the war in the 'aristocratic seclusion' of
rural Switzerland. Georg Bernhard, editor of a leading Nazi opposition
newspaper in France, called Hesse a 'fig-leaf for the Third Reich'.

Would I have been braver? I'd like to think so, though I can't know for
sure. The point is that all of Hesse's growth was a sort of mirror. It
never cared to engage the wider world. Above all, Hesse just wanted to
be left alone. In 1943, he was working on *The Glass Bead Game*, a
serene, utopian sci-fi novel that venerates the art of devoted
self-development. That year, with Europe a fiery slaughterhouse, he told
his son that the novel-in-progress offered him 'a totally pristine world
which I could inhabit, completely free of all immediate concerns'.

'Only one kōan matters,' wrote Ikkyū, a 15th-century Zen poet: 'You.'
Hesse would have agreed, and his life and work offer us a study of
devoted self-regard.

To a degree, Ikkyū is right. If you remain too much of a mystery to
yourself, you will rebound and ricochet through life with no sense of
how the thing you call you is producing your life. Hesse was a
passionate advocate of brutal self-examination, and for that his work
remains valuable.

We would all do well to coax out our shadow, to try to spark whatever
inner alchemy we're capable of. The hippies believed that there was
something in them, glittering, waiting to be unleashed. They found a
kindred spirit in Hesse. Hesse grabbed me too, when I was 19 and late to
the hippie party -- when I thought that the right combination of guitar
solos, magic mushrooms and earnest journalling would any moment coalesce
into the big abracadabra, and there would be no more secrets, no more
ticking clocks.

But ultimately, Hesse's life and work are also a warning. They
demonstrate how ruminating on the possibility of self-actualisation can
become a mental quicksand. It is dangerous to cease calibrating yourself
to the effect that you're having on the world beyond your skull. It's
all too easy to confuse the rumination with the growth itself. Many
hippies, even with enormous hearts in more or less the right places,
made -- make -- a version of this mistake. At some point, the
self-development has to be a means, not an end.

His novels sag with the clammy feeling of a man trading the hell of
other people for the melodrama of his own mind

Psychologised narcissism is still narcissism. Spiritual narcissism is
still narcissism. We see this with Hesse, who in both his life and his
fiction is captivated by his own feelings. This, I think, is why he
persists today as one of those authors whose biggest fans are almost
exclusively young. In his 'soul biographies', Hesse never seems to
escape that impression, so redolent of adolescence, that one's own
feelings are powerfully unique in both form and scale. Unrelentingly
beatific about one's capacity for compassion; unrelentingly despondent
at one's capacity for despair. In 1955, Hesse expressed annoyance 'at
schoolboys reading and enthusing over *Steppenwolf*; after all, the fact
is that I wrote this book shortly before my 50th birthday.' But like all
his novels, the emotional tenor of *Steppenwolf* is more befitting a
schoolboy than a middle-aged man. The sense that one is amorphously
rejected by the world; that one's own perception of things is sharper
than everyone else's but oh-so-lonely -- this is the self-absorbed mood
of youthful angst. There is something beautiful and right about this
phase of being; but it does possess a special sort of solipsism that
mature people eventually learn to ration. All of Hesse's protagonists
are, in their creator's image, spectacularly self-absorbed. The years
during which I most enjoyed Hesse were the years during which I was at
my most spectacularly self-absorbed.

Mark Harman, a translator of Hesse's letters, told me that 'although
Hesse rebelled against his Pietist parents, he retained some of their
core values.' Above all, Hesse never got out from under the Pietist
axiom that things of the here-and-now -- as opposed to things of a
transcendent, coming place -- are fallen, rotten from the get-go. This
is the main way in which the hippies -- who had zero hangups about the
pleasures of the senses -- misread Hesse. In Hesse's approach to writing
and to life, he recapitulated that old religious idea: that the mental
is nobler than the material. Describing his discovery of writing in
childhood, Hesse recalled a joy at how it let him feel 'detached from
the world, and untouched'. To him, writing was a cocoon of the blessedly
immaterial. The subterranean caves of the self were somewhere he could
clamber through and shelter from the daylight up above. Whenever Hesse
did engage with the upper realm, it was always at a distance. He spent
his later years in his quiet cottage writing 150 pages of letters to
strangers every single day -- while a sign hung on his front gate
saying: 'No Visitors, please.'

Ultimately, Hesse's search for wisdom forces us to confront a crucial
question: do you prefer your soul, or the world? 'Let us turn our gaze
inward,' says a character in *The Glass Bead Game*, 'then we will have
discovered the universe incarnate.' Hesse's novels sag with a heavy
hermeticism, the clammy feeling of a man trading the hell of other
people for the melodrama of his own mind. Perhaps, like Hesse, you
believe that self-knowledge is most valuable when it works in secret,
wearing the silken sheen of pure thought. Give me my silence, my cave,
my texts. But against this there is the opposite view: life is lived in
concert with other souls, or else it is a desolation. You get better at
loving, or else you are losing.

Novels such as *Demian*, *Siddhartha*, *Steppenwolf* and *The Glass Bead
Game* contain real insights. The world's wise have all, like Hesse,
attempted to take a sharp shovel to the cracked earth of their
character. But taken as a whole, Hesse's work and life demonstrate that
self-examination is a tightrope. We can take Hesse's writings, and see
what can be seen, down at those depths of self-exploration. Perhaps we
can gather some directions, for our own searches. But if the messy,
fleshy world of other souls matters to you, then pluck the pearls and
surface once again. In this life, the inward gaze will take you only
halfway.

**M.M. Owen** is a British nonfiction author and chief technical writer
at [Studio Mistfit](https://www.studiomisfit.co/). He obtained his PhD
at the University of British Columbia.

Thanks to \<a href="[https://aeon.co](https://aeon.co/)"\> aeon.com
\</a\>
