# The Man Who Shot Stonewall Jackson

![](stonewall-dies-2.jpg){class="a"}

## by Gary Beck

It happened once before, when I was a young man. The newspapers clamored
for war, self-appointed know-it-alls told us why we had to fight and
everyone believed them, especially the youngsters like me who got all
fired up to join the army. So now, when those big headlines screamed
'Remember The Maine,' there wasn't any more doubt that there would be
war with Spain. And off they went to enlist, just like they were going
to a picnic, as irreverent and ignorant as we were back in 1861. My
eldest son told me he had to join up and I tried to discourage him. I
told him how crazy it was for two groups of men to stand and blaze away
at each other, but he wouldn't listen. All he said was: \"War's not
fought that way anymore, Pa .\"

So I held my peace and watched him go, like my pa watched me go. When he
died of yellow fever, before he even fought in a battle, it was another
terrible affliction that I had to accept. But I guess he was right about
it being a new kind of war, because it was over pretty quick and we got
all these new places; Cuba, Puerto Rico, The Philippines and Guam. I
never even heard of Guam. So I kept on farming and doing my chores but I
was pretty much empty inside. I had been that way ever since the
surrender at Appomattox, which ended my daily suffering, but left me a
hollow man. I went through all the motions of the living and tried my
best to be a good husband and father, and I never told anyone how I
felt. How could anyone who hadn't been there understand? Sometimes, when
I went to town and saw the few old hands who survived the entire war,
like me, there was nothing we could say. We just looked at each other
for a moment, nodded in recognition that we were still alive and moved
on.

Then one day, long after Spain surrendered, I saw a soldier who had just
come home from the Philippines. I was buying something in Dahlgren's
general store and his pa brought him in. He had that look that I hadn't
seen since the war with the Yankees. His flesh was sagging on his bones
and his uniform hung on him like a scarecrow on a hard luck farm. He
walked as if it was a great effort to put one foot after the other. Old
Mr. Dahlgren kept prodding him to tell us what it was like over there,
but he refused to talk, until his pa urged him. Then he looked at
everyone for a moment and said coldly: \"You want to know what it was
like? I'll tell you. I watched my buddies die in ambushes, or of
tropical diseases, or in battles with savages who just kept coming at
us, even after we shot them. I watched my friends butcher women and
children!\" A look of absolute horror ate his face. \"All I saw was
death and suffering. Is that what you wanted to hear?\" Then he turned
and walked out. I couldn't get him out of my mind the rest of the day.

That night I thought about the war with the Yankees, which I had shut
out of my life a long time ago. I remembered how I had rushed to join up
that spring of 1861. I ignored Pa when he told me not to go, just like
my boy ignored me. Then Pa told me how bad it was when he fought the
Mexicans in '46, but I didn't believe him. Everyone I knew was hurrying
to the colors and I wasn't about to be last. We were going to whip the
Yankees good, then go back home with our chests full of medals. Once I
was in uniform it didn't take long for me to wake up. Almost half the
boys I joined up with got killed or wounded in our first battle at
Manassas. Maybe the Yankees finally ran off as fast as they could for
Washington D.C., but not before they put up a mighty good fight. We
fought up and down Virginia for the next two years and got leaner,
hungrier, tireder and sicker. The more we ran out of ammunition, food,
or shoes, the more the Yankees kept coming. We learned everything about
the horror of soldiering the hard way.

One day we were camped somewhere near Chancellorsville, after a tough
battle where we whipped the Yankees good. Of course it wasn't like when
the war first started. Then we knew we were better men then the city
folk and immigrants they were going to send against us. Before First
Manassas, most of us talked about beating them proper, then going home.
If anyone thought it would go on and on for years, they didn't say it
where I heard. Anyhow, we had been resting because it had been a long,
hard fight and these Yankees weren't like the rabbits who used to run
when they were beaten. When these Yankees lost, they retreated
resentfully and we knew they'd be back. Then the word raced through the
camp. Stonewall was dead. Rumors, like disease, travel swiftly in an
army, especially when it's bad news. This hit me and the old hands
particularly hard, because we were the 31^st^ Virginia and we were
Stonewall's men from the beginning.

We rushed to colonel Barstow's tent, but he didn't know any more than we
did. Messengers kept arriving, each one with different news. The only
thing they all agreed on was that Stonewall had been shot. The colonel
finally got tired of our pushing and shoving at the messengers and he
sent us back to our bivouac area. But he promised to let our company
commander, lieutenant Rambeau, know as soon as he learned anything. We
thanked the colonel, who was one of only three officers left in the
regiment who had been with us from the start. All the others had been
killed or invalided out. Colonel Barstow had started as a young
lieutenant, full of fire and noble speeches. Now he was as old and tired
as the rest of us. We snickered about lieutenant Rambeau as we walked.
He was a moma's boy, a blonde-haired stringbean with a mushy face that
always looked ready to cry. He had reported to the regiment a few days
ago, but he disappeared somehow before the fighting started. The joke
going around the camp was who would shoot him first, us or them.
Soldiers deserted other regiments before a fight, but not in the 31^st^
Virginia.

We waited for news, but didn't relax much. A couple of the younger boys
babbled about beating the Yankees again, but the old hands quickly shut
them up. By now we knew we could beat them and beat them, but they would
still keep coming. We were sick, tired, cold and hungry and we didn't
have much hope left. The gossip around the campfire was no longer about
victory. A few diehards still kept trying to convince the rest of us
that massa Robert and ole Stonewall would find a way to defeat the
Yankees. Most of us didn't buy it. Now Stonewall was dead. One of the
kids asked what would happen if General Lee got killed, but an old hand
kicked him a few times and the kid slunk off, leaving the rest of us to
brood about things. I couldn't help thinking how lucky that kid was to
get off so lightly. We had just lost our father and that dumb kid was
talking about losing our grandfather. We didn't need any more bad luck.

Later that night we found out that Stonewall wasn't dead, he was just
badly wounded. He had been returning from the battlefield in the dark
and a nervous sentry, thinking he was a Yankee goblin or something, shot
him. After two years of hurry up, then wait, it wasn't a hardship to
wait for news. We lost so many men at Chancellorsville that I guess they
forgot about our regiment for a while, so we loafed in our tents. Once
we packed up all the dead men's belongings, they finally remembered us.
They even gave us some food, probably pilfered from the Yankees endless
supply of everything. Then the word flew around camp faster than
wildfire. A new recruit named Billy Rawlins had shot Stonewall. They
didn't rightly know what to do with him, so they sent him home.

After Stonewall died, the war went on and on and the Yankees kept us on
the run. When it was finally over, those of us who survived went back to
our homes. I was one of the lucky ones. Pa had kept the farm going
somehow, despite the voracious armies trampling back and forth across
poor, battered Virginia. I had only been home for a couple of months
when I heard that the man who shot Stonewall Jackson, Billy Rawlins, had
hanged himself. It seems his pa kept telling him that he killed the man
who could have won the war for the Confederacy. I guess the damned fool
kid must have believed him, because he went into the barn, threw a rope
over a beam and ended his life... But that was a long time ago.

I hadn't thought about Billy Rawlins for many years. Seeing that soldier
in Dahlgren's store reminded me about what had eaten so much of my soul
away. It all came back to me from a distance, like hearing a voice on
that new telephone invention: the useless waste of young men, the
suffering that devastated so many lives, the ease with which we forgot
the dead. All I could think of was that if I knew then what I knew now,
I could have gone to see Billy. I could have told him that what he did
was just one more crazy mistake in a succession of terrible events. That
Stonewall couldn't have won the war. Hell, it was lost way before that.
Only fools believed that we could win after the first year or so. The
Yankees had everything. We only had pride and courage. Once they wore
out our pride, courage just wasn't enough. But my understanding of
things came much too late to help poor Billy. I couldn't help that
trooper who lost his soul in the jungle. And I sure couldn't help any of
the other innocents who don't start wars, only rush to fight them.

**Gary Beck** has spent most of his adult life as a theater director and
worked as an art dealer when he couldn\'t earn a living in the theater.
He has also been a tennis pro, a ditch digger and a salvage diver. His
original plays and translations of Moliere, Aristophanes and Sophocles
have been produced Off Broadway. His poetry, fiction and essays have
appeared in hundreds of literary magazines and his published books
include 38 poetry collections, 14 novels, 4 short story collections, 1
collection of essays and 7 books of plays. Gary lives in New York City.
