
# Living on a Smoke-Bomb of a Planet
### (Smoke Gets In Yours Eyes)

# ![](smoke-liberty,jpeg){class="a"}

### September 11th, Climate-Change-Style

## By [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

As it turns out, it's never too late. I mention that only because last
week, at nearly 79, I managed to visit Mars for the first time. You
know, the red planet, or rather --- so it seemed to me --- [the orange
plane](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/07/nyregion/nyc-wildfire-smoke-scenes.html)[t](https://www.washingtonpost.com/photography/interactive/2023/canada-wildfires-smoke-nyc-photos/).
And take my word for it, it was eerie as hell. There was no sun, just a
strange orange haze of a kind I had never seen before as I walked the
streets of that world (well-masked) on my way to a doctor's appointment.

Oh, wait, maybe I'm a little mixed up. Maybe I wasn't on Mars. The
strangeness of it all (and perhaps my age) might have left me just a bit
confused. My best hunch now, as I try to put recent events in
perspective, is that I wasn't in life as I'd previously known it.
Somehow --- just a guess --- that afternoon I might have become a
character in a science-fiction novel. As a matter of fact, I had only
recently finished rereading Walter M. Miller,Jr.'s sci-fi classic [**A
Canticle for
Leibowitz**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0060892994/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
last visited in 1961 at age 17. It's about a world ravaged by humanity
(using nukes, as a matter of fact) and, so many years later, still
barely in recovery mode.

I must admit that the streets I was traversing certainly
looked like they existed on just such a planet. After all, the ambience
had a distinctly end-of-the-world (at least as I'd known it) feel to it.

Oh, wait! I checked the news online and it turns out that it was neither
Mars, nor a sci-fi novel. It was simply my very own city, New York,
engulfed in smoke you could smell, taste, and see, vast clouds of it
blown south from Canada where [more than 400
wildfires](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/09/world/canada/quebec-canada-wildfires-locations.html)
were then burning in an utterly out of control, historically
unprecedented fashion across much of that country --- as, in fact, all
too many of them still are. That massive cloud of smoke swamped my
city's streets and
[enveloped](https://www.newsweek.com/before-after-pictures-smoke-new-york-1805322)****
****its most famous buildings, bridges, and statues in a horrifying
mist.

That day, New York, where I was born and have lived much of my life,
[reportedly
had](https://www.indiatimes.com/trending/social-relevance/new-york-overtakes-new-delhi-to-have-worst-air-quality-index-605225.html)
the worst, most polluted air of any major city on the planet ---
[Philadelphia](https://www.cbsnews.com/philadelphia/news/philadelphia-air-quality-smoke-fire-canada-wildfire/)
would take our place the very next day --- including an air quality
index that hit a previously unimaginable
[484](https://www.juancole.com/2023/06/courtesy-canadian-smokestorm.html).
That day, my city was headline-making in a way not seen since September
11, 2001. In fact, you might think of that Wednesday as the
climate-change version of 9/11, a terror (or at least terrorizing)
attack of the first order.

Put another way, it should have been a signal to us all that we --- New
Yorkers included --- now live on a new, significantly [more
dangerous](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/07/us/wildfire-smoke-safety-asthma-high-risk.html)
planet, and that June 7th may someday be remembered locally as a preview
of a horror show for the ages. Unfortunately, you can count on one
thing: it's barely the beginning. On an overheating planet where
humanity has yet to bring its release of greenhouse gasses from the
burning of coal, oil, and natural gas under any sort of reasonable
control, where summer sea ice is almost certain to be a [thing of the
past](https://www.cnn.com/2023/06/06/world/arctic-sea-ice-free-climate-change/index.html)
in a [fast-heating
Arctic](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/the-arctic-is-warming-nearly-four-times-faster-than-the-rest-of-the-world),
where sea levels are rising ominously and fires, storms, and droughts
are growing more severe by the year, there's so much worse to come.

In my youth, of course, a Canada that hadn't even made it to summer when
the heat hit record levels and fires began burning out of control from
Alberta in the west to Nova Scotia and Quebec in the east would have
been unimaginable. I doubt even Walter M. Miller, Jr., could have
dreamed up such a future, no less that, as of a week ago,
[1,400%](https://abcnews.go.com/US/canadas-wildfires-air-quality-warnings-connected-climate-change/story?id=99905554)
of the normal acreage of that country, or more than 8.7 million acres,
had already burned (with so much more undoubtedly still to come); nor
that Canada, seemingly caught unprepared, without [faintly enough
firefighters](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/09/world/canada/canada-firefighting-capacity.html),
despite recent all-too-flammable summers ---
[having](https://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/hundreds-of-american-firefighters-arrive-in-canada-to-help-battle-wildfires-1.6432188),
in fact, to [import
them](https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/alberta-wildfires-university-of-alberta-jen-beverly-andrew-1.6863691)
from around the world to help bring those blazes under some sort of
control --- would be in flames. And yet, for that country, experiencing
its fiercest fire season ever, one thing seems guaranteed: that's only
the beginning. After all, United Nations climate experts are now
suggesting that, by the end of this century, if climate change isn't
brought under control, the intensity of global wildfires could rise by
[another
57%](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/jun/07/canadas-wildfires-new-climate-reality-experts-officials-say).
So, be prepared, New Yorkers, orange is undoubtedly the color of our
future and we haven't seen anything like the last of such smoke bombs.

Oh, and that June evening, once I was home again, I turned on the [NBC
nightly
news](https://www.nbcnews.com/nightly-news-netcast/video/nightly-news-full-broadcast-june-7th-180966469551),
which not surprisingly led with the Canadian fires and the smoke
disaster in New York in a big-time way --- and, hey, in their reporting,
no one even bothered to mention climate change. The words went unused.
My best guess: maybe they were all on Mars.

****Been There, Done That****

In fact, you could indeed think of that June 7th smoke-out as the 2023
climate-change equivalent of September 11, 2001. Whoops! Maybe that's a
far too ominous comparison and I'll tell you why.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

On September 11, 2001, at the World Trade Center in New York, the
Pentagon in Washington, and aboard four hijacked jets, [almost 3,000
people
died](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casualties_of_the_September_11_attacks).
That was indeed a first-class nightmare, possibly the worst terrorist
attack in history. And the U.S. responded by launching a set of
invasions, occupations, and conflicts that came to be known as "the
global war on terror." In every sense, however, it actually turned out
to be a global war **of** terror, a 20-plus-year disaster of losing
conflicts that involved the killing of staggering numbers of people. The
latest estimate from the invaluable Costs of War Project is: [almost a
million](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/WarDeathToll)
direct deaths and possibly [3.7
million](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/IndirectDeaths)
indirect ones.

Take that in for a moment. And think about this: in the United States,
there hasn't been the slightest penalty for any of that. Just ask
yourself: Was the president who so disastrously invaded Afghanistan and
then Iraq, while he and his top officials [lied through their
teeth](https://theintercept.com/2023/03/19/george-bush-iraq-lies-trump/)
to the American people, penalized in any way? Yes, I do mean that fellow
out in Texas who's become known for his [portrait
painting](https://www.bushcenter.org/events-and-exhibits/portraits-of-courage)
in his old age and who, relatively recently,
[confused](https://www.nbcnews.com/think/opinion/george-bush-gaffe-ukraine-iraq-putin-rcna29829)
his decision to invade Iraq with Vladimir Putin's to invade Ukraine.

Or, for that matter, has the U.S. military suffered any penalties for
its record in response to 9/11? Just consider this for starters: the
last time that military actually won a war was in 1991. I'm thinking of
the first Gulf War and that "win" would prove nothing but a prelude to
the Iraq disaster to come in this century. Explain this to me then: Why
does the military that's proven [incapable of winning a
war](https://tomdispatch.com/war-what-is-it-good-for/) since that 9/11
terror attack still get more money from Congress than the next --- your
choice ---
[9](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/blog/2022/06/22/us-still-spends-more-military-next-nine-countries-combined/)
or
[10](https://www.pgpf.org/blog/2023/04/the-united-states-spends-more-on-defense-than-the-next-10-countries-combined)
militaries on this planet combined, and why, no matter who's in charge
in Washington, including cost-cutting Republicans, does the Pentagon
never --- no, absolutely **never** --- see a cut in its funding, only
yet more taxpayer dollars? (And mind you, this is true on a planet where
the real battles of the future are likely to involve fire and smoke.)

There may indeed be a "debt ceiling" in this country, but there seems to
be no ceiling at all when it comes to funding that military. In fact,
Republican hawks in the Senate [only recently
demanded](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/01/us/politics/debt-limit-senate.html)
yet more money for the Pentagon in the debt-ceiling debate (despite the
fact that, amid other cuts, its funding was already guaranteed to rise
by 3% or \$388 billion). As Senator Lindsey Graham so classically put it
about that (to him) pitiful rise, "This budget is a win for China."

Now, I don't mean to say that there's been no pain anywhere. Quite the
opposite. American troops sent to Afghanistan, Iraq, and so many other
countries came home
[suffering](https://tomdispatch.com/americans-in-pain/) everything from
literal wounds to severe post-traumatic stress syndrome. (In these
years, in fact, the suicide rate among veterans has been [unnervingly
high](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/nation/military-suicides-rise-15-as-senior-leaders-call-for-action).)

And did the American people pay? You bet. Through the teeth, in fact, in
a moment when inequality in this country was already going through the
roof --- or, if you're not one of the [ever-greater
numbers](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/07/magazine/billionaires.html)
of billionaires, perhaps the floor would be the more appropriate image.
And has the Pentagon paid a cent? No, not for a thing it's done (and, in
too many cases, is [still
doing](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/may/29/niger-cycle-of-deadly-violence-raises-questions-over-us-counter-terror-role)).

Consider this the definition of decline in a country that, as Donald
Trump and Ron DeSantis continue to make desperately clear, could be
heading for a place too strange and disturbing for words, a place both
as old as the present president of the United States (should he win
again) and as new as anyone can imagine.

****Will the Climate Version of 9/11 Become Daily Life?****

Throughout history, it's true that great imperial powers have risen and
fallen, but lest you think this is just another typical imperial moment
when, as the [U.S.
declines](https://tomdispatch.com/clinging-bitterly-to-guns-and-religion/),
China will rise, take a breath --- oops, sorry, watch out for that
smoke! --- and think again. As those Canadian wildfires suggest, we're
no longer on the planet we humans have inhabited these last many
thousand years. We're now living in a new, not terribly recognizable,
ever more perilous world. It's not just this country that's in decline
but Planet Earth itself as a livable place for humanity and for so many
[other
species](https://thehill.com/opinion/energy-environment/452617-climate-change-is-killing-millions-of-plants-and-animals-and/).
Climate change, in other words, is quickly becoming the climate
emergency.

And as the reaction to 9/11 shows, faced with a moment of true terror,
don't count on the response of either the United States or the rest of
humanity being on target. After all, as that smoke bomb in New York
suggests, these days, too many of those of us who matter --- whether
we're talking about the climate-change-denying [Trumpublican
Party](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/08/us/politics/wildfires-republicans-climate-change.html)
or the leaders of the Pentagon --- are fighting the wrong wars, while
the major companies responsible for so much of the terror to come, the
giant fossil-fuel outfits, continue to pull in
[blockbuster](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/exxon-chevron-shell-conocophillips-record-profits-earnings-oil-companies-most-profitable-year/)
--- no,
[record](https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/big-oil-doubles-profits-blockbuster-2022-2023-02-08/)!
--- profits for destroying our future. And that simply couldn't be more
dystopian or, potentially, a more dangerously smoky concoction. Consider
that a form of terrorism even al-Qaeda couldn't have imagined. Consider
all of that, in fact, a preview of a world in which a horrific version
of 9/11 could become daily life.

So, if there is a war to be fought, the Pentagon won't be able to fight
it. After all, it's not prepared for increasing numbers of smoke bombs,
[scorching
megadroughts](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/western-megadrought-is-the-worst-in-1-200-years/),
ever more powerful and [horrific
storms](https://www.npr.org/2023/03/01/1160302594/why-is-climate-change-causing-hurricanes-to-be-stronger),
melting ice, [rising sea
levels](https://www.reuters.com/business/environment/pace-rise-global-sea-level-has-doubled-un-climate-report-2023-04-21/),
[broiling
temperatures](https://www.reuters.com/business/environment/parts-china-sees-record-breaking-temperatures-2023-03-09/),
and so much more. And yet, whether you're American or Chinese, that's
likely to sum up our true enemy in the decades to come. And worse yet,
if the Pentagon and its Chinese equivalent find themselves in a war,
Ukraine-style or otherwise, over the island of Taiwan, you might as well
kiss it all goodbye.

It should be obvious that the [two
greatest](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/092915/5-countries-produce-most-carbon-dioxide-co2.asp)
greenhouse gas producers, China and the United States, will rise or fall
(as will the rest of us) on the basis of how well (or desperately
poorly) they cooperate in the future when it comes to the overheating of
this planet. The question is: Can this country, or for that matter the
world, respond in some reasonable fashion to what's clearly going to be
climate terror attack after terror attack potentially leading to
dystopian vistas that could stretch into the distant future?

Will humanity react to the climate emergency as ineptly as this country
did to 9/11? Is there any hope that we'll act effectively before we find
ourselves on a version of Mars or, as Donald Trump, Ron DeSantis, and
others like them clearly wish, fossil-fuelize ourselves to hell and
back? In other words, are we truly fated to live on a smoke bomb of a
planet?

Copyright 2023 Tom Engelhardt

**Follow TomDispatch on **[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)** and
join us on **[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)**. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, **[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel **[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**, and
Tom Engelhardt's **[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
as well as Alfred McCoy's **[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
John Dower's **[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
**and Ann Jones's** [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[**TomDispatch.com**](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He was also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [**The
End of Victory
Culture**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Thanks to 
[TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)

