# War, What Is It Good For?

![](engelhardt-war-img.png){class="a"}

### Remarkably Little If You\'re a \"Great\" Power on Planet Earth in the Twenty-First Century

## By [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

I was born on July 20, 1944, amid a vast global conflict already known
as World War II.  Though it ended with the atomic bombings of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki in August 1945 before I could say much more than "Mama" or
"Dada," in some strange fashion, I grew up at war. 

Living in New York City, I was near no conflict in those years or in any
since. My dad, however, had volunteered for the Army Air Corps at age 35
on December 8, 1941, the day after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
He fought in Burma, was painfully silent about his wartime experiences,
and died on Pearl Harbor Day in 1983. He was the operations officer for
the 1st Air Commandos and his war, in some strange sense, came home with
him. 

[]{#anchor}Like so many vets, then and now, he was never willing to talk
to his son about what he had experienced, though in my early years he
still liked his friends to call him "Major," his rank on leaving the
military.  When his war did come up in our house, it was usually in the
form of anger --- because my mother had shopped at a nearby grocery
store whose owners, he claimed, had been "war profiteers" while he was
overseas, or because my first car, shared with a friend, was a used
Volkswagen (German!), or my mom was curious to go --- god save us! ---
to a Japanese restaurant! 

The strange thing, though, was that, in those same years, for reasons we
never discussed, he allowed me briefly to have [a Japanese pen
pal](https://tomdispatch.com/bunker-busting-the-nuclear-taboo/) and,
though my dad and I never talked about the letters that boy and I
exchanged, we did soak the stamps off the envelopes he sent and paste
them into our latest Scott stamp album. 

As for evidence of my father's wartime experience, I had two sources. 
In the guest room closet in our apartment, he had an old green duffle
bag, which he'd go through now and then. It was filled to the brim with
everything from Army Air Corps documents to his portable mess kit and
even --- though I didn't know it then --- his pistol and bullets from
the war. (I would turn them over to the police upon his death a
quarter-century later.) 

Though he wouldn't talk with me about his wartime experience, I lived it
in a very specific way (or at least so it felt to me then). After all,
he regularly took me to the movies where I saw seemingly endless
versions of war, American-style, from the Indian wars through World War
II.  And when we watched movies of his own conflict (or, in my early
years, replays of [**Victory at
Sea**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victory_at_Sea) on our TV at home)
and he said nothing, that only seemed to confirm that I was seeing his
experience in all its glory, as the Marines inevitably advanced at
film's end and the "Japs" died in a spectacle of slaughter without a
comment from him. 

From those Indian wars on, as I wrote long ago in my book [**The End of
Victory
Culture**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
war was always a tale of their savagery and our goodness, one in which,
in the end, there would be an expectable "spectacle of slaughter" as we
advanced and "they" went down.  From the placement of the camera flowed
the pleasure of watching the killing of tens or hundreds of nonwhites in
a scene that normally preceded the positive resolution of relationships
among the whites.  It was a way of ordering a wilderness of human
horrors into a celebratory tale of progress through devastation, a
victory culture that, sooner or later, became more complicated to
portray because World War II ended with the atomic devastation of those
two Japanese cities and, in the 1950s and 1960s, the [growing
possibility](https://tomdispatch.com/prophesies-then-and-now/) of a
future global Armageddon.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

If war was hell, in my childhood at the movies, killing **them** wasn't,
whether it was the Indians of the American West or the Japanese in World
War II.

So, yes, I grew up in a culture of victory, one I [played
out](https://tomdispatch.com/in-the-zone-with-g-i-joe/) again and again
on the floor of my room.  In the 1950s, boys (and some girls) spent
hours [acting out](https://tomdispatch.com/in-the-zone-with-g-i-joe/)
tales of American battle triumph with generic fighting figures: a crew
of cowboys to defeat the Indians and win the West, a bag or two of
olive-green Marines to storm the beaches of Iwo Jima.

If ours was a sanguinary tale of warfare against savages in which
pleasure came out of the barrel of a gun, on floors nationwide we kids
were left alone, without apparent instruction, to reinvent American
history. Who was good and who bad, who could be killed and under what
conditions were an accepted part of a collective culture of childhood
that drew strength from post-World War II Hollywood.

****What Would My Dad Think?****

Today, 60-odd years later, having never been to war but having focused
on it and written about it for so long, here's what I find eerily
strange: since 1945, the country with the greatest military on the
planet that, in budgetary terms, now leaves the [next nine countries
combined](https://ips-dc.org/u-s-still-spends-more-on-military-than-next-nine-countries-combined/)
in the dust, has never --- and let me repeat that: **never**! --- won a
war that mattered (despite engaging in all too many spectacles of
slaughter).  Stranger yet, in terms of lessons learned in the world of
adult culture, every lost war has, in the end, only led this country to
[invest more
taxpayer](https://tomdispatch.com/congress-has-been-captured-by-the-arms-industry/)
dollars in building up that very military.  If you needed a long-term
formula for disaster in a country threatening to come apart at the
seams, it would be hard to imagine a more striking one. So long after
his death, I must admit that sometimes I wonder what my dad would think
of it all.

Here's the thing: the American experience of war since 1945 should have
offered an all-too-obvious lesson for us, as well as for the planet's
other great powers, when it comes to the value of giant military
establishments and the conflicts that go with them.

Just think about it a moment, historically speaking.  That global
victory of 1945, ending all too ominously with the dropping of those two
atomic bombs and the slaughter of possibly [200,000
people](https://thebulletin.org/2020/08/counting-the-dead-at-hiroshima-and-nagasaki/),
would be followed in 1950 by the start of the Korean War.  The
statistics of death and destruction in that conflict were, to say the
least, staggering.  It was a spectacle of slaughter, involving the
armies of North Korea and its ally the newly communist China versus
South Korea and its ally, the United States.  Now, consider the figures:
out of a Korean population of 30 million, as many as [three million may
have died](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Korean_War), along with an
estimated [180,000
Chinese](https://www.cnn.com/2022/09/16/asia/china-south-korea-war-remains-repatriated-intl-hnk-mic-ml/index.html)
and about [36,000
Americans](https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/local/2000/06/25/death-miscount-etched-into-history/ab9d6830-b10d-429c-a3b0-cbdbaa3a23d1/). 
The North's cities, bombed and battered, were left in utter ruin, while
the devastation on that peninsula was almost beyond imagining. It was
all too literally a spectacle of slaughter and yet, despite ours being
the best-armed, best-funded military on the planet, that war ended in an
all-too-literal draw, a 1953 armistice that has never --- not to this
day! --- turned into an actual peace settlement. 

After that, another decade-plus passed before this country's true
disaster of the twentieth century, the war in Vietnam --- the first
American war I opposed --- in which, once again, the U.S. Air Force and
our military more generally proved destructive almost beyond imagining,
while at least a [couple of
million](https://www.britannica.com/question/How-many-people-died-in-the-Vietnam-War)
Vietnamese civilians and more than a million fighters died, along with
58,000 Americans.

And yet, in 1975, with U.S. troops withdrawn, the southern regime we had
supported collapsed and the North Vietnamese military and its rebel
allies in the South took over the country.  There was no tie as there
had been in Korea, just utter defeat for the greatest military power on
the planet.

****The Rise of the Pentagon on a Fallen Planet****

Meanwhile, that other superpower of the Cold War era, the Soviet Union,
had --- and this should sound familiar to any American in 2023 --- [sent
its massive military](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet–Afghan_War),
the Red Army, into... yes, Afghanistan in 1979. There, for almost a
decade, it battled Afghan guerrilla forces [backed and significantly
financed](https://tomdispatch.com/best-of-tomdispatch-chalmers-johnson-the-cia-and-a-blowback-world/)
by the CIA and Saudi Arabia (as well as by a specific Saudi named [Osama
bin
Laden](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/binladen/etc/cron.html)
and the tiny group he set up late in the war called --- yes, again! ---
al-Qaeda). In 1989, the Red Army limped out of that country, leaving
behind [perhaps two
million](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet–Afghan_War) dead
Afghans and
[15,000](https://www.nytimes.com/1989/02/16/world/last-soviet-soldiers-leave-afghanistan-after-9-years-15000-dead-and-great-cost.html)
of its own dead. Not so long after, the Soviet Union itself imploded and
the U.S. became the only "great power" on planet Earth. 

Washington's response would be anything but a promised "peace dividend."
Pentagon funding barely dipped in those years. The U.S. military did
manage to invade and occupy the tiny island of
[Grenada](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_invasion_of_Grenada)
in the Caribbean in 1983 and, in 1991, in a highly publicized but
relatively low-level and one-sided encounter, drove Iraqi ruler Saddam
Hussein's Iraqi troops out of Kuwait in what would later come to be
known as the **First **Gulf War. It would be but a preview of a hell on
Earth to come in this century.

Meanwhile, of course, the U.S. became a singular military power on this
planet, having established [at least 750 military
bases](https://tomdispatch.com/the-all-american-base-world/) on every
continent but Antarctica.  Then, in the new century, in the immediate
wake of the 9/11 terror attacks, President George W. Bush and his top
officials, incapable of imagining a comparison between the long-gone
Soviet Union and the United States, sent the American military into ---
right! --- Afghanistan to overthrow the Taliban government there. A
disastrous occupation and war followed, a prolonged [spectacle of
slaughter](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/human/civilians/afghan)
that would only end after 20 years of blood, gore, and massive expense,
when President Biden pulled the last U.S. forces out amid chaotic
destruction and disorder, leaving --- yes, the Taliban! --- to run that
devastated country. 

In 2003, with the Bush administration's invasion of Iraq (on the [false
grounds](https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2019/3/20/18274228/ari-fleischer-iraq-lies-george-w-bush-wmds)
that Saddam Hussein was developing or had weapons of mass destruction
and was somehow linked to Osama bin Laden), the Second Gulf War began.
It would, of course, be a disaster, leaving [several hundred
thousand](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/WarDeathToll)
dead Iraqis in its wake and (as in Afghanistan) thousands of dead
Americans as well.  Another spectacle of slaughter, it would last for
endless years and, once again, Americans would draw [remarkably
few](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/learning-nothing-from-the-iraq-war)
lessons from it.

Oh, and then there's the war on terror more generally, which essentially
helped spread terror around significant parts of the planet. Nick Turse
recently caught this reality with a single statistic: in the years since
the U.S. first began its counter-terror efforts in West Africa early in
this century, terror incidents there have soared [by
30,000%](https://theintercept.com/2023/04/02/us-military-counterterrorism-niger/).

And the response to this? You know it all too well. Year after year, the
Pentagon's budget has only grown and is now heading for the
[trillion-dollar
mark](https://tomdispatch.com/congress-has-been-captured-by-the-arms-industry/). 
In the end, the U.S. military may have achieved just one success of any
significance since 1945 by becoming the most valued and best-funded
institution in this country. Unfortunately, in those same years, in a
genuinely strange fashion, America's wars came home (as they had in the
Soviet Union once upon a time), thanks in part to the spread of
military-style assault rifles, now owned by [one in
20](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/ar15-rifle-nashville-school-shooting-b2310833.html)
Americans, and [other
weaponry](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/apr/15/south-dakota-governor-kristi-noem-grandchild-guns-nra)
(and the barrage of [mass
killings](https://www.gunviolencearchive.org/reports/mass-shooting) that
went with them). And there remains the distinctly unsettling possibility
of some version of a new civil war with all its Trumpian implications
developing in this country.

I doubt, in fact, that Donald Trump would ever have become president
without the disastrous American wars of this century. Think of him, in
his own terrorizing fashion, as "fallout" from the war on terror.

There may never, in fact, have been a more striking story of a great
power, seemingly uncontested on Planet Earth, bringing itself down in
quite such a fashion. 

****Last Words****

Today, in Ukraine, we see but the latest grim example of how a vaunted
military, strikingly funded in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet
Union --- and I'm talking, of course, about Russia's army --- has once
again been sent into battle against lesser forces with remarkably
disastrous results.  Mind you, Vladimir Putin and crew, like their
American counterparts, should have learned a lesson from the Red Army's
disastrous experience in Afghanistan in the previous century.  But no
such luck.

There should, of course, be a larger lesson here --- not just that
there's no glory in war in the twenty-first century but that, unlike in
some past eras, great powers are no longer likely to experience success,
no matter what happens on the battlefield.

Let's hope that the rising power on this planet, China, takes note, even
as it regularly organizes [threatening military
exercises](https://apnews.com/article/china-military-taiwan-us-7549c646a377f1f199d2cda983573279)
around the island of Taiwan, while the Biden administration continues to
ominously
[heighten](https://www.thenation.com/article/world/philippines-balikatan-war-games-us-military/)
the U.S. military presence in the region.  If China's leaders truly want
to be successful in this century, they should avoid either the American
or Russian versions of war-making of our recent past. (And it would be
nice if the Cold Warriors in Washington did the same before we end up in
a conflict from hell between two nuclear powers.)

It's decades too late for me to ask my father what his war truly meant
to him, but at least when it comes to "great" powers and war these days,
one lesson seems clear enough: there simply is nothing great about them,
except their power to destroy not just the enemy, but themselves as
well.

I can't help wondering what my dad might think if he could look at this
increasingly disturbed world of ours.  I wonder if he wouldn't finally
have something to say to me about war.

Copyright 2023 Tom Engelhardt

**Follow TomDispatch on **[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)** and
join us on **[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)**. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, **[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel **[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**, and
Tom Engelhardt's **[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
as well as Alfred McCoy's **[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
John Dower's **[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
**and Ann Jones's** [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[**TomDispatch.com**](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He was also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [**The
End of Victory
Culture**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**.**

