
# Don Antonio\'s Last Meeting

![](viejo-sabio-2.jpg){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

No one knew Don Antonio\'s full name. Some people asked him frequently
enough, but he always smiled and didn\'t answer, as if to say -- \"What
does it matter?\" I am not even sure that his real name was Antonio. And
what did it matter? Don Antonio was a \"sabio\", a wise man. He came to
the Plaza San Martín in the center of Buenos Aires twice a month,
Sundays, sat on one of the benches with his knapsack alongside him and
waited.

Soon the word would spread that he was there and his devotees -- myself
among them -- as well as curious onlookers, flocked to question him and
hear his answers. And he had answers to everything under the sun. After
attending these impromptu meetings several times, I began to take notes
(Don Antonio didn\'t permit recordings, he didn\'t say why, simply shut
up when someone clicked \"record\", and until they shut off the
machine.) During the \"Proceso de Reconciliación Nacional\" , that is,
the military dictatorship, he was arrested and \"disappeared\". He had
foreseen that this would happen, even told us that it would. He could
have stopped the meetings and saved himself, but he didn\'t. The
following is the conversation, reconstructed from my notes, of that last
meeting.

\"Good afternoon,\" Don Antonio said, when about a dozen of us were
assembled around him, some sitting on the ground, others squatting,
still others standing. A man in a dark suit and sunglasses standing in
the rear was obviously a spy. \"This may well be our last meeting.\"

\"Why is that, Don Antonio?\" Marisa, a university student asked.

\"You know, my dear, that the present government distrusts thinking. And
my purpose is to make you think. Therefore I am considered a threat.\"

\"But why should thinking be considered a threat?\"

Don Antonio smiled. \"If someone in authority, the president, the mayor,
or a general -- especially a general, and these are all the same thing
now for the president, the mayor and many others in authority are of the
various military ranks -- tells you something, and you think about what
he said, you may come to the conclusion that it isn\'t true. People in
authority don\'t like that, they think that everything they say should
be believed.\"

Gerardo, who was a lawyer, said, \"But what if what they say is true?\"

\"How would they know what is true if they don\'t think?\" Don Antonio
rejoined.

\"Don\'t they think?\"

\"Of course not. Who thinks nowadays? Oh, they may have ideas about what
should or what should not be done, but these have been handed down to
them by others. They don\'t think about them.\"

\"Do you think, Don Antonio, that the previous so-called democratic
government was any better in this respect?\" Gerardo asked.

\"As far as thinking is concerned, by no means.\" Don Antonio looked up
and waved his arm. \"Do you see those pigeons? They are circling above
us because they *think* we might have some corn for them. If we did, and
threw it on the ground, the sparrows would come as well to get their
share. The pigeons would chase the sparrows away, but these latter would
dart in and out picking the choicest morsels and the pigeons would lose
time and food trying to keep them away. We have all seen this happen.
But are they thinking? No, all this happens by instinct, and the
sparrows\' instinct is more intelligent that the pigeons\'. And their
only interest, both species, is filling their bellies. With men, if you
substitute power for food, the same thing happens. They think as little
as the birds, they only react to stimuli.\"

\"I must disagree with you, Don Antonio,\" Gerardo said, eyeing the spy
in dark glasses uneasily.

\"About the pigeons and the sparrows?\" Don Antonio asked with a sly
grin.

\"No, I agree as far as they are concerned.\"

\"Then?\"

\"I mean men -- and women for that matter---\"

\"Yes,\" Don Antonio interrupted, \"women for that matter. When I say
\"men\", it is in the generic sense of mankind. I don\'t intend to say
man and woman every time I open my mouth.\" The group consisted of a
majority of women, by the way.

\"Well, \" Gerardo went on, \"even if a person is mistaken, he has still
thought about what he was mistaken.\"

\"It depends on what you mean by thinking. If he thinks that what he is
about to do is for the benefit of the fatherland, even if it involves
acts which are morally wrong, then his thinking is a mere program, not
really thinking, which is an individual mental, spiritual experience.

\"But who knows what is morally right or wrong? If everything a
political state did had to be morally right, nothing would ever get
done,\" Gerardo protested, and many nodded in agreement.

\"That is true,\" Don Antonio said with his habitual wry smile, \"but is
it not preferable not to act than to act wrongly?\"

\"Well, yes, but...\"

\"Wait,\" Don Antonio interrupted. "Allow me to explain. May I?\"

\"Of course,\" Gerardo said.

\"Yes, please explain,\" a pretty young woman with indigenous features
said.

\"We all want to be happy\", Don Antonio said, \"do we not?\"

Everyone except the spy nodded.

\"Good. And how can one be happy in this life in which there is so much
to be unhappy about?\"

\"To know, love and serve God,\" a nun, who happened to be passing by
and had stopped as Don Antonio asked the question, said with
determination.

\"Ah," Don Antonio said, squinting up at her. "quoting from the
Catechism, I see. That\'s all right, but does it have anything to do
with thinking?\"

The nun remained silent, so I answered for her: \"No, Don Antonio, it\'s
only following orders.\"

\"God\'s orders,\" the nun said. If looks could kill, I wouldn\'t be
writing this.

\"Does anyone here *know *God?\" Don Antonio asked, moving his gaze
around the group and finally stopping at the nun, who was a pale young
woman sweating under her heavy religious habit. None of us answered him.

\"You see? You shouldn\'t feel bad though. No one has ever known God \--
except, according to him, his Son. It follows therefore that if we
don\'t know God, we can\'t really love him.\" He waited for this to sink
in and for a reaction. The nun was obviously tempted to move away, but
the temptation to hear what would come next was stronger.

Don Antonio smiled warmly. \"That doesn\'t mean, however, that we can\'t
*serve* Him.\" The nun looked relieved and smiled wanly back.

\"But each must decide for himself exactly what that means. What, in
fact, is the will of God.\"

\"We were talking about happiness, Don Antonio,\" Gerardo said
impatiently, glancing at his watch.

\"Indeed we were,\" Don Antonio agreed. \"But the two matters are
related. In any case, I repeat my original question: How is it possible
to be happy? What must one do?\"

\"Have a good job or better still own a profitable business and make a
lot of money,\" a shabbily dressed young man, who looked as though he
hadn\'t had a decent meal in a week, said.

\"I suspect, my friend, that you say that because you have neither.\"

\"You\'re right,\" the young man said, \"and there are many like me.\"

\"And do you think that if you had those things you would be happy?\"

\"A hell of a lot happier than I am now.\" There were giggles in the
group at this.

\"That may be so,\" Don Antonio said, smiling, \"for I don\'t know how
unhappy you are now. However, I ask you to consider that I have none of
those things, yet I am happy.

\"The girl with the indigenous features asked: \"I believe you, Don
Antonio. I have none of those things either, yet I am\...well, not
unhappy.\"

\"Wonderful!\" Don Antonio exclaimed. \"Do you know why?\"

\"No, I don\'t. That\'s why I\'d be interested in knowing if you know
why you are happy.\" Her accent was of the north of the country.

\"Just because she\'s not unhappy, does that mean she\'s happy?\"
Gerardo asked, not looking very happy himself.

"To a certain extent, yes -- but not completely. If someone doesn't hate
it doesn't mean that he or she loves, does it?"

"Of course not. That's what I meant."

"Do any of you know what the Declaration of Independence of the United
States says about happiness?" Don Antonio asked, to the general
consternation of the group.

"Screw the rest of you?" A wise guy in the back said, to giggles.

Don Antonio smiled. "It may seem like that sometimes, or even often. But
what it really says is that all men are created equal and have the right
to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."

After a silence, I said, "...the *pursuit *of happiness?"

"Exactly, my friend, not happiness itself, but its pursuit. Whatever one
may think of the United States' current foreign policy, the words in its
Declaration of Independence are most praiseworthy. They say nothing of
money, or property or slaves, though these things were certainly in
people's minds. It doesn't say that we have the right to happiness,
which would be absurd, for how can a political document promise
something so far beyond its ability to deliver?"

"Those are just words, Don Antonio," Gerardo insisted, "like liberty,
equality, fraternity in the French Revolution. They sound good but in
practice don't exist."

"But if we pursue something -- like happiness, or liberty, equality and
fraternity, then they must exist somewhere, if only on the horizon."

"In our imagination," the shabby fellow said.

"And imagination is a function of thinking, so all these things exist
when we think about them. Our thoughts, you see, are real."

"That sounds familiar," a young woman of great beauty on one side of her
face said. The other side was horribly scarred from a wound or a burn.

"Fine, I'm glad you recognized it," Don Rovino admitted. "I'm not the
first to say it, nor will I be the last. That doesn't make it less
true."

"More true?" the scarred woman asked.

Don Antonio bowed his head, as though in homage to her. Then he looked
away from her and spoke again to the rest of us. "In order to pursue
happiness one needs freedom. Not even the holiest saint can be happy in
a cell. Do you agree?" We nodded.

"And we should not be fearful."

No one nodded\...except the spy, who put his thumb and forefinger in his
mouth and whistled sharply. Two cops, who had been leaning against the
statue of General San Martín smoking heard him. They regretfully tossed
their half-smoked butts to the ground, stamped on them, and hurried
toward us.

Don Antonio had also seen them. He stood up "One more thing, the most
important, " he said calmly: "love. One may have faith and even hope
without freedom, but for love freedom is necessary."

The cops took him by the arms, one on each side, and pulled him to the
curb where a green Ford Falcon was waiting. The spy opened a back door
and the cops pushed Don Antonio in and followed him.

We never saw him again. He was one of the "disappeared" ones who never
again appeared.

