# Blindman's Buff

![](guantanamo-rally.jpg){class="alarge"}

### America's Continuing Quest to Hide Torture

## By [Karen J. Greenberg](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/karengreenberg/)

In the [Blindman's
Buff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_man%27s_buff#/media/File:Blind-Man's_Buff,_Paul_Jarrard_&_Sons.JPG)
variation of tag, a child designated as "It" is tasked with tapping
another child while wearing a blindfold. The sightless child knows the
other children, all able to see, are there but is left to stumble
around, using sounds and knowledge of the space they're in as guides.
Finally, that child does succeed, either by bumping into someone,
peeking, or thanks to sheer dumb luck.

Think of us, the American public, as that blindfolded child when it
comes to our government's torture program that followed the 9/11
disaster and the launching of the ill-fated war on terror. We've been
left to search in the dark for what so many of us sensed was there.

[]{#anchor}We've been groping for the facts surrounding the torture
program created and implemented by the administration of President
George W. Bush. For 20 years now, the hunt for its perpetrators, the
places where they brutalized detainees, and the techniques they used has
been underway. And for 20 years, attempts to keep that blindfold in
place in the name of "national security" have helped sustain darkness
over light.

From the beginning, the torture program was enveloped in a language of
darkness with its [secret "black
sites"](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2017/01/25/what-are-black-sites-6-key-things-to-know-about-the-cias-secret-prisons-overseas/)
where savage interrogations took place and the [endless blacked-out
pages of
documents](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0521853249/nationbooks08)
that might have revealed more about the horrors being committed in our
name. In addition, the [destruction of
evidence](../../../../../../../../../Users/karengreenberg/Desktop/4/mar/12/cia-senate-row-documents-feinstein-brennan)
and the [squelching of internal
reports](https://www.aclu.org/press-releases/cia-refuses-disclose-interrogation-tape-documents?redirect=cpredirect/39807)
only expanded that seemingly bottomless abyss that still, in part,
confronts us. Meanwhile, the courts and the justice system consistently
supported those who insisted on keeping that blindfold in place,
claiming, for example, that were defense attorneys to be given details
about the interrogations of their clients, national security would
somehow be compromised.

Finally, however, more than two decades after it all began, the tide may
truly be turning.

Despite fervid attempts to keep that blindfold in place, the search has
not been in vain. On the contrary, over these last two decades, its
layers have slowly worn away, thread by thread, revealing, if not the
full picture of those medieval-style practices, then a damning set of
facts and images relating to torture, American-style, in this century.
Cumulatively, investigative journalism, government reports, and the
testimony of witnesses have revealed a fuller picture of the places,
people, nightmarish techniques, and results of that program.

****First Findings****

The fraying of that blindfold took endless years, starting in December
2002, when **Washington Post** writers Dana Priest and Barton Gellman
[reported](https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2002/12/26/us-decries-abuse-but-defends-interrogations/737a4096-2cf0-40b9-8a9f-7b22099d733d/)
on the existence of secret detention and interrogation centers in
countries around the planet where cruel, unlawful techniques were being
used against war-on-terror captives in American custody. Quoting from a
2001 State Department report on the treatment of captives, they wrote,
"The most frequently alleged methods of torture include sleep
deprivation, beatings on the soles of the feet, prolonged suspension
with ropes in contorted positions and extended solitary confinement."

Less than a year later, the American Civil Liberties Union, along with
other groups, filed [a Freedom of Information Act
request](https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/torturefoia/legaldocuments/nnACLUFOIArequest.pdf)
(the first of
[many](https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/torturefoia/legaldocuments/index.html))
for records pertaining to detention and interrogation in the war on
terror. Their goal was to follow the trail leading to "numerous credible
reports recounting the torture and rendition of detainees" and our
government's efforts (or the lack thereof) to comply "with its legal
obligations with respect to the infliction of cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment."

Then, in 2004, the blindfold began to show some initial signs of wear.
That spring, [CBS News's 60 Minutes
II](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/abuse-at-abu-ghraib/) showed the first
photographs of men held at Abu Ghraib, an American-controlled prison in
Iraq. They were, among other things, visibly naked, hooded, shackled,
and threatened by dogs. Those pictures sent journalists and legal
advocates into a frenzied search for answers to how such a thing had
happened in the wake of the Bush administration's invasion of Iraq. By
that fall, they had obtained internal government documents exempting any
war on terror captives from the usual legal protections from cruelty,
abuse, and torture.
[Documents](https://www.amazon.com/Torture-Papers-Road-Abu-Ghraib/dp/0521853249)
also appeared in which specific techniques of torture, renamed "enhanced
interrogation techniques" (EITs), were authorized by top officials of
the Bush administration. They would be used on prisoners in secret CIA
locations around the world (119 men in 38 or more countries).

None of this, however, yet added up to "Tag! I found you!"

****Senator Feinstein's Investigation****

Before George Bush left office, [Senator Dianne
Feinstein](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/06/22/the-inside-war)
began a congressional investigation into the CIA interrogation program.
In the Obama years, she would battle to mount a full-scale one into the
torture program, defying most of her colleagues, who preferred to follow
President Obama's
[advice](https://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/12/us/politics/12inquire.html)
to "look forward as opposed to looking backwards."

But Feinstein refused to back down (and we should honor her courage and
dedication, even as we witness [the present
drama](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/19/us/politics/dianne-feinstein-older-lawmakers-senate.html)
of her insistence on remaining in the Senate despite a devastating
process of aging).  Instead of retreating, Feinstein only doubled down
and, as chair of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, launched
an in-depth investigation into the torture program's evolution and the
grim treatment of those prisoners at what came to be known as "CIA black
sites."

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0691216576/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Feinstein's investigator, Daniel Jones, spent years reading through six
million pages of documents. Finally, in December 2014, her committee
issued a [525-page "executive
summary"](https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/publications/CRPT-113srpt288.pdf)
of his findings. Yet his full report --- 6,700 pages with 35,300
footnotes --- remained classified on the grounds that, were the public
to see it, national security might be harmed. Still, that summary
convincingly laid out not just the widespread use of torture but how it
"proved not to be an effective means of obtaining accurate information."
In doing so, it dismantled the CIA's justification for its EITs which
rested on "claims of their effectiveness."

Meanwhile, Leon Panetta, Obama's director of the CIA, conducted an
internal investigation into torture. Never declassified, the [Panetta
Review](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/21/world/cia-report-found-value-of-brutal-interrogation-was-inflated.html),
as it came to be known, reportedly found that the CIA had inflated the
value of the information it had gotten with the use of torture
techniques. For example, in the brutal interrogation of the alleged
mastermind of 9/11, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the Agency claimed that
those techniques had elicited information from him that helped thwart
further terrorist plots. In fact, the information had been obtained from
other sources. The review reportedly acknowledged that EITs were [in no
way as
effective](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/panetta-review-cia_n_6334728)
as the CIA had claimed.

****The Cultural Sphere****

In those years, bits of light from the cultural world began to
illuminate the dark horror of those enhanced interrogation techniques.
In 2007, after President Bush had acknowledged the use of just such
"techniques" and had moved 14 detainees from the CIA's black sites to
Guantánamo, his infamous offshore prison of injustice in Cuba,
documentary filmmaker Alex Gibney directed [**Taxi to the Dark
Side**](https://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/18/movies/18taxi.html). It told
the story of Dilawar, a taxi driver in Afghanistan who died in American
custody after severe mistreatment. That film would be one of the
earliest public exposés of cruelty and mistreatment in the war on
terror.

But such films [didn't always
yield](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/zero-dark-thirty-the-report/id1683056140?i=1000613172772)
doses of light. In 2012, for instance, **Zero Dark Thirty**, a movie
heavily [influenced by CIA
advisers](https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/11/zero-dark-thirty-cia-access-three-internal-agency-investigations-kathryn-bigelow-mark-boal),
argued that those harsh interrogations had helped keep America safer ---
specifically by leading U.S. authorities to bin Laden, a meme often
repeated by government officials. In fact, reliable information leading
to bin Laden had been obtained without those techniques.

Increasingly, however, films began to highlight the voices of those who
had been tortured. **The Mauritanian**, for example, was based on
[**Guantánamo
Diary**](https://www.amazon.com/Guantanamo-Diary/dp/1786891859/ref=asc_df_1786891859/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=509360428472&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=13690828645247236586&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9004228&hvtargid=pla-673603193494&psc=1), a
memoir by Mohamedou Ould
Slahi[,](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/12/us/politics/torture-post-9-11.html)
a tortured Mauritanian held at that prison for 14 years. Slahi, never
charged, was finally released and returned to Mauritania. As **New York
Times** reporter [Carol
Rosenberg](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/12/us/politics/torture-post-9-11.html)
summed up his experience, "The confessions he made under duress \[were\]
recanted \[and\] a proposed case against him \[was\] deemed by the
prosecutor to be worthless in court because of the brutality of the
interrogation."

****Abu Zubaydah****

Last year, award-winning documentary filmmaker Alex Gibney once again
gave us a film on torture, **The Forever Prisoner**, focused on a
Guantánamo detainee, Abu Zubaydah, whose real name is Zayn al-Abidin
Muhammed Husayn. On him, the CIA first tested its harsh interrogation
techniques, claiming he was a leading member of al-Qaeda, an assumption
later disproved. He remains one of only three Gitmo detainees neither
charged by the military commissions at that prison, nor cleared for
release.

Nothing captures the futility of the blindfold --- or sometimes even the
futility of lifting it --- more than Zubaydah's story, which was at the
heart of the story of torture in these years. The Senate Select
Committee's 525-page executive summary referred to him no less than
1,343 times.

Captured in Pakistan in 2002 and first taken to a series of black sites
for interrogation,
[Zubaydah](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/01/us/politics/un-gitmo-abu-zubaydah.html)
was initially believed to be the third highest-ranking member of
al-Qaeda, a claim later abandoned, along with the allegation that he had
even been a member of that terrorist organization. He was the detainee
for whom enhanced interrogation techniques were first authorized by
National Security Advisor [Condoleezza
Rice](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/23/condoleezza-rice-cia-waterboarding),
relying in part on the Justice Department's greenlighting of such
techniques as "lawful" rather than as torture (legally forbidden under
both domestic and international law). Joe Margulies, Zubaydah's lawyer,
[summarized](https://www.nybooks.com/online/2018/09/28/the-innocence-of-abu-zubaydah/)
the horrific techniques used on him this way:

> "His captors hurled him into walls and crammed him into boxes and
> suspended him from hooks and twisted him into shapes that no human
> body can occupy. They kept him awake for seven consecutive days and
> nights. They locked him, for months, in a freezing room. They left him
> in a pool of his own urine. They strapped his hands, feet, arms, legs,
> torso, and head tightly to an inclined board, with his head lower than
> his feet. They covered his face and poured water up his nose and down
> his throat until he began to breathe the water, so that he choked and
> gagged as it filled his lungs. His torturers then left him to strain
> against the straps as he began to drown. Repeatedly. Until, just when
> he believed he was about to die, they raised the board long enough for
> him to vomit the water and retch. Then they lowered the board and did
> it again. The torturers [subjected
> him](https://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/20/world/20detain.html) to this
> treatment at least eighty-three times in August 2002 alone. On at
> least one such occasion, they waited too long and Abu Zubaydah nearly
> died on the board."

In addition, as [Dexter
Filkins](https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/how-did-abu-zubaydah-lose-his-eye)
reported in the **New Yorker** in 2016, Zubaydah lost his left eye while
in CIA custody.

As the Feinstein committee's [torture
report](https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/publications/CRPT-113srpt288.pdf)
makes clear, CIA personnel present at that black site cabled back to
Washington the importance of erasing any information about the nature of
Zubaydah's interrogation, implicitly acknowledging just how wrongful his
treatment had been. The July 2002 cable asked for "reasonable assurance
that \[Abu Zubaydah\] will remain in isolation and incommunicado for the
remainder of his life." CIA higher-ups assured the agents that "all
major players are in concurrence that \[Abu Zubaydah\] should remain
incommunicado for the remainder of his life."

Sadly enough, that promise has been kept to this very day. In 2005, CIA
officials [authorized the
destruction](https://jnslp.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/04_Cox.pdf) of
the tapes of Zubaydah's questioning and, never charged with a crime, he
is still in Guantánamo.

And yet, despite the promise that he would remain incommunicado, with
each passing year we learn more about what was done to him. In October
2021, in fact, in the **United States v. Zubaydah, **the justices of the
Supreme Court for the first time openly discussed his treatment and
Justices Sonia Sotomayer, Neil Gorsuch, and Elena Kagan publicly [used
the
word](https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/2021/20-827_l6gn.pdf)
"torture" to
[describe](https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/2021/20-827_l6gn.pdf)
what was done to him.

Elsewhere as well, the blindfold has been shredded when it comes to the
horror of torture, as ever more of Zubaydah's story continues to see the
light of day. This May, [the
](https://www.theguardian.com/law/2023/may/11/abu-zubaydah-drawings-guantanamo-bay-us-torture-policy)[**Guardian**](https://www.theguardian.com/law/2023/may/11/abu-zubaydah-drawings-guantanamo-bay-us-torture-policy)
published a story about a report done by the Center for Policy and
Research at Seton Hall University Law School that included a series of
40 drawings Zubaydah had made and annotated at Guantánamo. In them, he
graphically depicted his torture at CIA black sites and at that prison.

The images are beyond grotesque and, like a cacophonous symphony you
can't turn off, it's hard to witness them without closing your eyes.
They show beating, shackling from the ceiling, sexual abuse,
waterboarding, confinement in a coffin, and so much more. In one picture
that he titled "The Vortex," the techniques were combined as Zubaydah
--- in a self-portrait --- cries out in agony. Attesting to the accuracy
of the scenes he drew, the faces of his torturers have been blacked out
by the authorities to protect their identities.

As the** Guardian**'s Ed Pilkington reported, Helen Duffy, Mr.
Zubaydah's international legal representative, highlighted how
"remarkable" it was that his drawings had ever seen the light of day
even though he hasn't "been able to communicate directly with the
outside world" in all these endless years.

****Calls for Action****

In the years of the Biden presidency, the international community has
focused on Guantánamo in unprecedented ways. In January 2022, "after 20
years and well over 100 visits," the International Committee of the Red
Cross (the
[ICRC)](https://www.icrc.org/en/document/icrc-calls-transfers-eligible-guantanamo-detainees)
called for the release of as many of the remaining prisoners there as
possible and, more recently, raised alarm over the failing health and
premature aging of its 30 aging inmates.  

Recently, the United Nations carved out new ground as well. In April,
the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention issued [an
opinion](https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/documents/issues/detention-wg/opinions/session95/A-HRC-WGAD-2022-66-Advance-Edited-Version.pdf)
condemning the brutality long used against Mr. Zubaydah and called for
his immediate release. That group further noted that the continued
detention of the prisoners at Guantánamo could potentially "constitute
crimes against humanity."

With each passing year, ever more details about Washington's torture
programs have come to light. Yet, even now, ferocious attempts are still
being made to keep the blindfold in place. As a result, to this day
we're left searching, arms extended, while those who have crucial
information about this country's nightmarish commitment to torture do
their best to avoid us, hoping that the endless passage of time will
keep them out of reach until we pursuers finally run out of energy.

To this day, much still remains in darkness, while Congress and American
policymakers continue to refuse to address the legacy of such
wrongdoing. But as the constant dribble of information suggests, the
story simply won't go away until, someday, the United States officially
acknowledges what it did --- what, if others were now doing it, would be
instantly denounced by the same lawmakers and policymakers. That history
of torture won't go away, in fact, until this country apologizes for it,
declassifies as much of the Feinstein report as possible, and provides
for the rehabilitation of Abu Zubaydah and others whose physical and
psychological health was savaged by their mistreatment at American
hands.

It's one thing to say, as Barack Obama [told
Congress](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-obama-torture-sb/america-does-not-torture-obama-tells-congress-idUSTRE51O0RY20090225)
a month into his presidency, that the United States "does not torture."
It's another to expose the misdeeds of the war on terror and accept the
costs as deterrence against it ever happening again.

Copyright 2023 Karen J. Greenberg

Featured image: [Shepard Fairey Sign at Guantánamo
Bay](https://flickr.com/photos/shriekingtree/23341463711/in/photolist-ByB6Xv-b6LKEF-d8ke3-99uUab-4Etbym-7xmmDH-e8MCv8-BeLoyS-7wSFif-7xmmEe-e8TgCG-e8MCu4-e8TgBb-5D2Kes-AJtD4V-2ob4w2C-7vuhEH-6eh63f-3igNze-2ob3BUk-2ob4vUy-9a6BDU-qv9FDV-qv8sen-7kq9Hr-2idCbZs-7xmeYe-7xmeZe-7xq3Cu-7xmeZX-7xmeY4-7xq3G7-7xq3JS-7xmeTP-7xq3Du-7xmePk-qLFsSq-QADxc7-BeMQ9C-qv8snP-qv9FL8-qv22zq-7tGiLd-qLKC7H-qLAiTH-xj8mr-2oaYEJQ-qMzmon-qubu5L-qMzkBc)
by [Justin Norman](https://flickr.com/photos/shriekingtree/) is licensed
under [CC BY-SA 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/) /
Flickr

**Follow TomDispatch on **[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)** and
join us on **[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)**. Check
out the newest **Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, **[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel **[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**, and
Tom Engelhardt's **[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
as well as Alfred McCoy's **[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
John Dower's **[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
**and Ann Jones's** [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Karen J. Greenberg](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/karengreenberg/)

****Karen J. Greenberg****, a
[**TomDispatch**](https://tomdispatch.com/the-real-failure-of-january-6th/)[
regular](https://tomdispatch.com/the-real-failure-of-january-6th/), is
the director of the Center on National Security at Fordham Law. Her most
recent book is [**Subtle Tools: The Dismantling of American Democracy
from the War on Terror to Donald
Trump**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0691215839/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
now out in paperback. Kevin Ruane and Claudia Bennett contributed
research for this article.

Thanks to \<a href="tomdispatch.com"\> TomDispatch.com\</a\>

.
