![](/goya-letter.jpg){class="a"}

# Letters to the Editor

RE: [Breathe ](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html)

Dear Becky,

Thank you for your incredible insight to deliver a truth so elegantly
written. It was read to me at the end of a breath work meditation and
produced in me a cathartic experience. Thank you thank you thank you for
your beautiful words, these words will now follow me into my own
practise, with due acknowledgement and prayers.

Love & Light,

Sophia le Stelle Whittingham

I love it, I keep it on my tablet and read occasionally, just to remind
myself to breathe,

Thank you,

Sadie McKee

RE: [Brain and Thinking](https://southerncrossreview.org/151/steiner-brain-and-thinking.html)

One of the most important I have seen concerning active thinking.

Soren Dalsgaard

RE: [Knock On Wood](https://southerncrossreview.org/152/fts-knock-on-wood.html)

Great tale, Frank. Surprised you didn't publish it in SCR sooner.

Robert Zimmer

RE: [Love in the Life of Spies](https://southerncrossreview.org/152/love-spies-2.html)

Dear Frank,

I have just finished the full book (Love in the Life of Spies). It was
really great! There is only one aspect of it which I could not believe:
that Jacks did not realize **right away** that Olga is Judith and Judith
is Olga. Even if he was half drunk when he first met Olga, and even if
many years went by, that oblivion is unbelievable to me. Anyway, other
than that, a really fascinating \'reincarnation romance\'! :)

Cheers, Norbert Hanny

RE: [War, What Is It Good For?](https://southerncrossreview.org/152/engelhardt-war.html)

I applaud the article on the one hand, but on the other it seems to me
that intelligent Americans, including Tom, will never fail to point to
America as the foremost nation in various regards, such as being a
military power that dwarfs all others, in this case the \"next 9
countries combined." Objectively, this will be quite true, however, it's
a mistake to raise it as a trump card in any way. It should not be
raised at all. The need to raise it should be overcome. This playing up
of America, often unintentionally, produces a superiority effect that is
quite an obstacle of getting positive international results. I would
like to hear from a single American historian who actually talks up
other countries, especially those whose peacefulness is internationally
required, and also refrains from pointing to American successes and
failures in superlatives, whatever they may be, all of which infallibly
gives the impression that America is after all the greatest. It is
exactly that perception which Americans have trouble escaping from at
all times. It does not help to establish a "level" playing field. I
guess, humility, a humble posture vis a vis others just ain't the thing
New Yorkers do. While it could be so productive! For example, in
negotiating with Russia on the Ukraine. Let the Donbas and Crimea go in
some Russian administered form of live and let live, and get Russia
itself to join he West: reestablish all trade links and more, terminate
further NATO expansion in a peace treaty without further security
guarantees for anyone, avoid military references, apply neutrality to
states on the edge, freeze the status quo otherwise, introduce
co-operation, dangle possibilities, and so on. Talk to Russia, bring in
Russia because it can be brought in if there is the will. Obviously,
Russia ought to be part of Europe! That's where it is! Dear US, play
yourself down, take Russia's fear away, praise Russia AND the
Ukrainians, and do not refer to your greatness, even implicitly. Don't
let China get in first.

Nick Maync-Matsumoto

RE: [Mother Earth](https://southerncrossreview.org/151/hemsley-mother-earth.html)

Nice straightforward simple truth but ... the last two lines raise the
question is/ are there typos .... Wonder if it shouldn't read'.
'...rearrange •your• heart...', since it's clearly an admonishment to
us, the readers. Doesn't it also read kind of grammatically strange for
the last words to be 'the earth', when all through we have used the
pronouns she and her implicitly referring to the title. Jars the flow of
logic, raising question, 'is this "earth" the same one we've been
referencing all through?'

Admit I may be missing something or the poetic flaw, if such, very
minor. Otherwise a beautiful recognition of the archetypal equivalency
of Nature & the psychic Feminine. I think the reader might do well to
include 'mind' with 'heart', that would benefit from 'rearranging'.
Since we are all integral with this Feminine insofar as we are in
physical living bodies, seems our task is to - globally, earth wide -
rearrange our consciousness, or Masculine element, relative to 'holding'
this Mother well, while we do whatever else.... flying off to the
Kosmos....

Richard Reitz

RE: [The Man Who Shot Stonewall Jackson](https://southerncrossreview.org/152/beck-stonewall.html)

Just great writing and story telling.

Many thanks

Joanna Carey

RE: SouthernCrossReview.org

Dear Frank,

I enjoy many of the articles in Southern Cross, which I have only come
across in the past couple years - thank you for doing it!  I am curious
how and what you know of Don Cruse, whose articles on Monism and
Steiner, I have come by via *Southern Cross*.  He is a careful thinker.
I am also curious where you live and what has motivated you to put out
*Southern Cross*.

Thank you for whatever you can share.  

Warm regards,

Ned Hulbert

Hi Ned,

I didn\'t know Don Cruse personally, only through correspondence related
to his articles. He died some time ago. And yes, he was a careful and
sharp thinker. This is from an article bio:

**Don Cruse** was born in 1933 in London, England, grew up there
during the war years and now lives in retirement on a farm in central
Alberta, Canada. He is married with four adult children and three
grandchildren. He has been a student of anthroposophy now for nearly
fifty years, and considers \'The Philosophy of Freedom\' to be Rudolf
Steiner\'s most important single work.\
\
By Don Cruse: \'Evolution and the New Gnosis, Anti-establishment Essays
on Knowledge Science, Religion and Causal Logic\' (ISBN 0-595-22445-8)\
\
Why Darwinism is the result of a serious error in verbal logic. (essays
3,4,8,19, 11 & 21).\
\
Why \'goodness\' not \'truth\' should be the principal concern of
religion. (essay 16)\
\
Democracy is often defined as the \'rule of law\', but if the law itself
is unjust it is tyranny that rules. How may we ensure that only just
laws can exist? What constitutes a sufficient \'theory of legal
obligation?\' (essay 18).\
\
Many of these essays have been published by Southern Cross Review and
may be found in our archives (back issues)\...\....

I live in a small town in Argentina (Villa de las Rosas) - under the
Southern Cross.

Kind regards,

Frank
