# Refuting Darwin

# by Frank Thomas Smith

I know, I know, Darwin is a scientific icon and who am I to presume
to refute him. Let's just say that I am a guy with a mind and mouth of
my own who likes to shoot both off somewhat more than occasionally.
And...and yes, I see logical real-life huge contradictions in
Darwinism, contradictions which deserve to be refuted as intelligently
as possible. So much for apologetics.

First of all, I do not wish to refute Darwin's theory completely. I
admit, even agree that there is such as thing as the evolution of
species and I admire Darwin's great achievement of observation and
literate description of the evolutionary process. Where I stumble over
a nasty stone in the path is his conclusion that the modifications
which occur are accidental. Let's take a couple of the most famous
examples: 

![](galapagos.gif){class="a"}

During Darwin's trip to South America aboard The Beagle, he spent two
weeks in the Galápagos Islands where he observed the finches which
lived on the various islands. The ones with beaks better suited for
eating cactus got more food and thus survived in arid environments,
whereas those with beaks better suited for extracting nectar from
flowers or eating seeds in other environments were the survivors
because of those obvious advantages. He first called this process
"natural selection", but later, following Thomas Malthus, also called
it "survival of the fittest". Now the question is whether the
variations in the finch population was caused by the environment or
the variations occurred first and the affected birds found themselves
already adapted to their new environment -- "new" because it is
assumed that they had originally emigrated from the mainland where the
observed finches had none of the Galápagos variations. 


![](finches.gif){class="a"}

Darwin decided that the environment was not causing the variations within the finch
populations.  He thought that the variation already existed and that
"nature" selected the most suitable beak shapes for the respective
environments and rejected as hopeless the less useful ones.  (Lamarck
on the other hand thought that the environment altered the shape of
individuals and that these acquired changes were then inherited after
the fact.) More on this important difference below. 

In 1798, Thomas Malthus, an English clergyman and
economist, calculated that human populations will double every 25
years unless there isn't enough food to go around, a rather brutal
"natural" form of birth control. When Darwin read Malthus\' essay he
thought that all plants and animals will potentially increase in
population unless they are constantly kept in check by predators,
diseases, and limitations in food, water, and other resources that are
essential for survival. In other words: survival of the fittest
through "natural" selection, according to which those least likely to
die off are most likely to pass on their traits to the next generation
of birds, mice, moths and men.

An example of evolution resulting from so-called natural selection
was discovered among \"peppered\" moths living near English industrial
cities during the 19^th^ century.  The moths vary in coloration from
light to dark.  Soot and smoke from coal burning furnaces killed the
lichen on trees and darkened the bark.  According to theory, when
moths landed on these trees and other blackened surfaces, the dark
colored ones were harder to spot by birds who ate them and,
subsequently, they more often lived long enough to reproduce.  Over
generations, the environment continued to favor darker moths.  As a
result, they progressively became more common.  By 1895, 98% of the
moths in the vicinity of English cities like Manchester were mostly
black.  Since the 1950\'s, air pollution controls have significantly
reduced the amount of heavy air pollutants reaching the trees. As a
result, lichen has grown back, making trees lighter in color.  In
addition, once blackened buildings were cleaned making them lighter in
color.  Now, according to Darwinist theory, natural selection favors
lighter moth varieties so they have become the most common.  This
trend has been well documented by field studies undertaken between
1959 and 1995 by Sir Cyril Clarke from the University of Liverpool. 
The same pattern of moth wing color evolutionary change in response to
increased and later decreased air pollution has been carefully
documented by other researchers for the countryside around Detroit,
Michigan.  


![](moths.gif){class="a"}

While it is abundantly clear that there has been an evolution in
peppered moth coloration due to the advantage of camouflage over the
last two centuries, it is important to keep in mind that this story of
natural selection in action is incomplete, because there may have been
additional factors involved. Furthermore, one may question whether
light colored moths even attempted to alight on the lichenless trees
or that dark ones were particularly attracted to lighter colored ones.
Or that predator birds are really fooled by the color of
moths.[^1]


What most bothers me, however, is the assumption that the
variations in form or color of the creatures involved occurred before
their residence in favorable environments. If that were the case, our
mysterious "natural selection" would have had to know beforehand that
a select number of the species intended to emigrate to the
environments which most suited their variation and granted them the
requisite visas of beak form or color. Darwinists must deny this of
course -- but what other explanation do they have? Oh yes: that there
was a previous accidental mutation which just happened to correspond
to the future alien homeland. That such a thing may have happened a
few times is at least plausible, but that it has happened innumerable
times in the evolutionary history of the earth is just as likely as
that a monkey typing away at a computer will eventually write the
Bible if given enough time. The only real evidence in the two
phenomena mentioned is that the beaks of certain Galápagos finches are
indeed suited to their environment and that dark moths live on dark
tree bark and light moths live on light bark. The Why and the How,
however, are pure speculation. Ingenious yes, but unproven.
Furthermore, if the variations occurred *after* the creatures moved to
new locations, Darwin\'s theory collapses like a carelessly
constructed castle of cards, because in that case the cause is known
and it\'s not natural selection, but the environment. 


Let's move on now to man, the subject which most interests us,
because...well...it's us! The extant animals that look most like man
are the apes. They have two legs and two arms -- although the arms
also serve as legs -, hands which can grasp objects and groom their
peers; they nurture their young. They mostly live in trees. Although
they possess a certain limited intelligence, they can not speak, which
raises the question about their ability to think or whether their
intelligence is equivalent to instinct. The Darwinist theory is that
one day one of them, due to an accidental variation (in the brain?)
decided to descend to earth and stay there -- although it's hard to
see the practical advantage to this. Then another mutation transformed
grunts into words and upright carriage. Until finally, voilá! A real
guy or doll. (Sorry for the irony, but the whole thing is so
simplistic that I can't help myself.) A problem I see is: Why don't
apes continue to evolve and become more human? Also: Where is the
missing link between them and man? A possible answer to the first
question is that evolution is too slow to notice; and to the second
that there are bony vestiges of proto-humans, such as, and especially,
the Neanderthals. But the Neanderthals lived for thousands of years
co-existent with humans. How, then, could one group of partners -- or
more likely enemies -- evolve from the other? Was there inter-species
mating? Who knows? But even if there was it's not evolution, it\'s
procreation. A more modern idea is that those proto-human species were
branches that died off without being able to continue their evolution.
This sounds eminently reasonable, but is again speculation.      

According to Karl Popper, "The mark of a scientific theory is
whether it makes predictions that could in principle serve to falsify
it." In other words: Can it be falsified? If we accept this
definition, then Darwinism isn't even a respectable theory because it
cannot be falsified. Oh, elements of it can. Spurious bones have been
found in order to enhance a scientist's reputation. But I am not
refuting evolution as such, only the philosophical, the speculative,
the How and the Why. There is no way to falsify the concept of
"natural selection" which in any case is a mere metaphor: how can
"selection" occur naturally, i.e., without being consciously selected?
(See Don Cruse\'s articles on this subject in
[Archives](https://southerncrossreview.org/scr_Archives.htm)).


I am not offering a competing theory, only attempting to refute
Darwin by calling the causal part of his theory speculative and
therefore unproven and unscientific. Others have probably done it
better, but at the moment Darwinism is king and queen and anyone
questioning it is called a creationist or ingenuous. I agree with the
philosopher Thomas Kuhn who asserted that "the history of science is
punctuated by violent intellectual revolutions that overturn long
periods of conservative puzzle-solving\...and research which questions
the current accepted theories are debunked as wild and useless
speculation.\" So there is no *gradual* development of scientific
thought, but rather sudden jumps of genius which overthrow what was
previously considered gospel truth.


I am confident that just as Copernicus dethroned Aristotle and
Ptolemy, and Einstein rocked Newton's universe, someone will come
along sooner or later to overthrow Darwinist orthodoxy and deface the
icon.       

[^1]: A reader, Graham Kennish, sent us this article by Craig Holdrege
about Peppered Moths two days after the above article was published.
It puts the whole peppered moth \"proof\" in even more serious doubt:\
[The Case of the Peppered
Moth](http://www.natureinstitute.org/txt/ch/moth.htm)


