# Toward a Threefold Society

![](threefold-cover.jpg){class="a"}

### Basic Issues of the Social Question

## by Rudolf Steiner

#### Introduction

*Basic issues of the Social Question* was written in 1919 for the
German-speaking peoples of central Europe. It deals with the social
problems of that time and suggests solutions. The question therefore
arises: Is this book still relevant today, in a new millennium, for a
worldwide readership?

In order to answer this question, let us first look at the book\'s very
last paragraph: "One can anticipate the experts who object to the
complexity of these suggestions and find it uncomfortable even to think
about three systems cooperating with each other, because they wish to
know nothing of the real requirements of life and would structure
everything according to the comfortable requirements of their thinking.
This must become clear to them: either people will accommodate their
thinking to the requirements of reality, or they will have learned
nothing from the calamity and will cause innumerable new ones to occur
in the future."

The calamity referred to is the First World War, and since that time
history has certainly shown these words to be prophetic. Rudolf
Steiner\'s suggestions were ignored in Central Europe at that time, at
least by those who were in a position to put them into practice, and the
calamities have been occurring \'innumerably\' ever since. The \'social
question\' has not been resolved, nor have the steps been taken which
are necessary to initiate the healing process. People all too often
still look to the political state for the solution to all social
problems, whether they be of an economic, spiritual (cultural), or
political nature.

Where in the world is \'spiritual life\', schools for example, free, not
in the sense of cost, but free from state control and economic
influence? Where does an associative economy function? What political
state is content with its legitimate function of ensuring that human
rights are respected? The answer to all these questions is negative. The
destructive tendencies which existed in 1919 are still very much with
us; in fact, they have greatly increased their potency.

Certain historical circumstances are referred to, especially in Chapter
Four, which were fresh in the minds of the readers in that part of the
world at the time the book was written. Rudolf Steiner was born on 27
February 1861, in the town of Kraljevec, which was then in
Austro-Hungary and is now in Croatia (he died on 30 March 1925 in
Dornach, Switzerland), so the events relating to such political entities
as the Austro-Hungarian and German empires were entirely familiar to him
and, for the most part, to his readers. This is no longer the case, so
\'Notes\' have been added which can, however, only include a very brief
description of the historical events referred to by the author.

This book is far from outdated, in spite of the fact that certain
descriptions refer to specific occurrences and attitudes of the times in
which it was written. The suggestions and *essential principles* given
by Rudolf Steiner are even more relevant today than when they were
originally described, if only because their realization has since become
even more urgent.

Frank Thomas Smith (translator)

[Preface to the Fourth German Edition](threefold-preface.html)

This book is available in paperback or Kindle from Amazon:

[https://www.amazon.com/Toward-Threefold-Society-Issues-uestion/dp/1948302160](https://www.amazon.com/Toward-Threefold-Society-Issues-uestion/dp/1948302160)
