### Esoteric Lessons for the First Class of the School for Spiritual
Science at the Goetheanum

![](goetheanum.jpg)

**Introduction**

During the re-founding of the Anthroposophical Society at
Christmas 1923, Rudolf Steiner also reconstituted the "Esoteric
School" which had originally functioned in Germany from 1904 until
1914, when the outset of the First World War made it\'s
continuance impossible.

However, the original school was only for a relatively few
selected individuals, whereas the new school was incorporated into
the *School for Spiritual Science* at the Goetheanum in Dornach,
Switzerland.

Rudolf Steiner was only able to give nineteen lessons -- plus
seven "recapitulation" lessons -- for the First Class before his
illness and death. His intention had been to develop three
classes. After his death, the Anthroposophical Society\'s
Executive Council was faced with the dilemma of what to do about
the Esoteric School -- to try to continue it without Rudolf
Steiner, or not. He had not designated a successor. And what to do
with the stenographic records of the Class lectures.

Rudolf Steiner had always insisted that the lectures were not to
be published. In fact the members of the School were only
permitted to copy the mantra - and not the text of the lectures -
for their own personal contemplation. The dilemma was further
complicated by the dispute between Marie Steiner -- Rudolf
Steiner\'s legal heir -- and the rest of the Executive council,
which claimed **all** of Steiner\'s lectures for the Society. (The
dispute was eventually settled by the Swiss courts in favor of Mrs
Steiner.)

The Anthroposophical Society was permitted to hand out manuscripts
of the lectures to its so-called designated "readers", who read
each lecture to the members of the school in their particular area
or country. This system is still practiced.

**Marie Steiner wrote:**

"How can we preserve the treasure with which we have been
entrusted? Not by hiding it away, thereby simply giving our
enemies the opportunity to do with it what they will, but by
trusting in the good spiritual powers and thereby giving new
generations the possibility of receiving a stimulus in their souls
that will kindle the spiritual light slumbering there, a light
that will awaken in their souls what the powers of destiny have
sown in them."

Marie Steiner, letter of January 4, 1948

The lectures were published in German in manuscript book form in
1977 by the Rudolf Steiner Estate (Nachlassverwaltung -- Marie
Steiner\'s legal successor) in a limited edition and sold only
upon written request to anthroposophists.

However, pirated editions containing errors and falsifications
occurred to the extent that the Rudolf Steiner Estate decided to
make the printed volumes in German generally available in 1992.

As far as we know, the lectures in English translation are
appearing in public availability for the first time here in
Southern Cross Review.

Frank Thomas Smith - Editor

[Lesson One](https://southerncrossreview.org/139/steiner-esoteric-one.html)

