# Letters to the Editor

RE: <a href="southerncrossreview.org/139/drone-cometh.html">The Drone
Cometh</a> by Frank Thomas Smith

Hi Frank, In Dutch is a saying \"too far from our bed\". It\'s difficult
to understand the suffering of the vets and even more the suffering of
the people who are being bombed and humiliated day after day for years
and it is easy to not feel responsible for the horrors of war. Nice
poem. I remember the drone attack to the wedding.

Thank you for bringing it back to my mind.

Antonio Romeu

RE: <a href="southerncrossreview.org/139/class-intro.html"> Esoteric
Lessons for the First Class \....</a> by Rudolf Steiner

From a most grateful reader, we are very grateful for your work in
posting this lecture from the First Class. For years I had wondered what
was so special about the First Class. Now I have something to work with
in my meditations - I am so thankful for your presence and your
gifts\.... 

Therese Osborne

RE: <a href="southerncrossreview.org/139/brown-girl-creed">Brown Girl
Creed </a>by Barbara Jane Reyes

Lovely to read and think about. Though I was born white and blond, but
hazel -eyed, there was a wonderful hint from one of my grandmothers who
was born on a reservation, yet never mentioned, that hinted to a skin
color I easily acquired by spending time outside,especially in the
summer when I became very toasty brown and kept this color long into
winter into spring for all these 77 years. I am brown, too, and cook
like my mothers.

Kendall Weaver

RE: <a href="southerncrossreview.org/138/letters138.html">Letters to
the Editor SCR 138</a>

Awesome. You have a stellar set of readers

Raun Griffiths

RE: SouthernCrossReview.org weekly articles

Frank:

I am really enjoying reading your archival articles. It was difficult
for me to read a whole magazine full of big long texts, but this is just
right week by week. Keep it coming!

Pyracantha

Zoroastrian student

Gracias estimado Frank por tus valiosos envíos. Yo tengo hace mucho
tiempo en nuestra biblioteca : Rudolf Steiner, aspects of his spiritual
world view. Anthroposophy volume 1. Roy Wilkinson. Un gran tesoro que
necesito releer y meditar más a menudo.

Silvia Martini
