# Be Careful What You Wish For

![](taliban-soldiers.jpg){class="alarge"}

### The True Lessons of the Afghan War

## By [Rajan Menon](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/rajanmenon/)

Disagreements over how to assess the American exodus from Afghanistan
have kept the pundits busy these last weeks, even though there wasn't
much to say that hadn't been said before. For some of them, however,
that was irrelevant. Having [overseen or
promoted](https://www.thenation.com/article/society/press-cheerleaders-afgan-war/)
the failed Afghan War themselves, all the while brandishing various
"metrics" of success, they were engaged in transparent
reputation-salvaging.

Not surprisingly, the entire spectacle has been tiresome and
unproductive. Better to devote time and energy to distilling the Afghan
war's larger lessons.

[]{#anchor}Here are four worth considering.

**Lesson One: When You Make Policy, Give Serious Thought to Possible
Unintended Consequences**

The architects of American policy toward Afghanistan since the late
1970s bear responsibility for the disasters that occurred there because
they couldn't, or wouldn't, look beyond their noses. As a result, their
policies backfired with drastic consequences. Some historical
scene-setting is required to understand just why and how.

Let's start in another country and another time. Consider the December
1979 decision of the leadership of the Soviet Union to send in the Red
Army to save the ruling Marxist and pro-Soviet People's Democratic Party
of Afghanistan (PDPA). Having seized control of that country the
previous year, the PDPA was soon pleading for help. By centralizing its
power in the Afghan capital, Kabul (never a good way to govern that
land), and seeking to modernize society at breakneck speed --- through,
among other things, promoting the education and advancement of women ---
it had provoked an Islamic insurgency that spread rapidly. Once Soviet
troops joined the fray, the [United
States](https://www.amazon.com/Ghost-Wars-Afghanistan-Invasion-September/dp/0143034669),
assisted by Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Pakistan, and even
[China](https://thediplomat.com/2018/09/how-the-1980-laid-the-groundwork-for-chinas-major-foreign-policy-challenges/),
would start funding, arming, and training the *mujahedeen*, a collection
of Islamist groups committed to waging *jihad* there.

The decision to arm them set the stage for much of what happened in
Afghanistan ever since, especially because Washington gave Pakistan
[carte
blanche](https://foreignpolicy.com/2014/07/14/riedel-the-war-against-the-soviets-in-afghanistan-was-run-by-zia-not-by-us/)
to decide which of the jihadist groups would be armed, leaving that
country's powerful [Inter-Services Intelligence
Agency](https://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/afghan2/Afghan0701-02.htm) to
call the shots. The ISI favored the most radical *mujahedeen* groups,
calculating that an Islamist-ruled Afghanistan would provide Pakistan
with "strategic depth" by ending India's influence there.

India did indeed have close ties with the PDPA, as well as the previous
government of Mohammed Daoud, who had overthrown King Zahir Shah, his
cousin, in 1973. Pakistan's Islamist parties, especially the
[Jama'at-i-Islami](https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/3c6a3f7d2.pdf), which
had been proselytizing among the millions of Afghan refugees then in
Pakistan, along with the most fundamentalist of the exiled [Afghan
Islamist
groups](https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/reports/2007/R3970.pdf),
also helped recruit fighters for the war against the Soviet troops.

From 1980 until 1989, when the defeated Red Army finally departed from
Afghanistan, Washington's foreign policy crew focused in a single-minded
fashion on expelling them by arming those anti-Soviet insurgents. One
rationale for this was a ludicrous theory that the Soviet move into
Afghanistan was an initial step toward Moscow's ultimate goal:
conquering the oil-rich Persian Gulf.  The spinners of this apocalyptic
fantasy, notably President Jimmy Carter's hawkish national security
adviser, [Zbigniew
Brzezinski](https://www.amazon.com/Outlier-Unfinished-Presidency-Jimmy-Carter/dp/B08KWP5X79/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&qid=1630712126&refinements=p_27%3AKai+Bird&s=books&sr=1-1),
seemed not to have even bothered to peruse a map of the terrain between
Afghanistan and the Gulf. It would have shown that among the obstacles
awaiting Russian forces headed there was the 900-mile-long,
14,000-foot-high [Zagros mountain
range](https://www.geolsoc.org.uk/Policy-and-Media/Outreach/Plate-Tectonic-Stories/Hartland-Quay/Zagros-Range).

Enmeshed in a Cold War-driven frenzy and eager to stick it to the
Soviets, Brzezinski and others of like mind gave no thought to a
critical question: What would happen if the Soviets were finally
expelled and the *mujahedeen* gained control of Afghanistan? That lapse
in judgment and lack of foresight was just the beginning of what proved
to be a chain of mistakes.

Though the PDPA government outlasted the Red Army's retreat, the
collapse of the Soviet Union in late 1991 proved a death sentence for
its Afghan allies. Instead of forming a unity government, however, the
*mujahedeen* promptly turned on one another. There ensued a vicious
civil war, pitting Pashtun mujahedeen groups against their Tajik and
Uzbek counterparts, with Kabul as the prize. [The
fighting](https://journals.openedition.org/samaj/212) destroyed large
parts of that city's western and southern neighborhoods, killing as many
as 25,000 civilians, and forcing 500,000 of them, nearly a third of the
population, to flee. So wearied were Afghans by the chaos and
bloodletting that many were relieved when the Taliban, themselves former
participants in the anti-Soviet *jihad*, emerged in 1994, established
themselves in Kabul in 1996, and pledged to reestablish order.  

Some of the Taliban and Taliban-allied leaders who would later make the
United States' most-wanted list had, in fact, been bankrolled by the CIA
to fight the Red Army, including [Jalaluddin
Haqqani](https://web.stanford.edu/group/mappingmilitants/cgi-bin/groups/print_view/363),
founder of the now-infamous Haqqani Network, and the notoriously cruel
[Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2019/01/07/history-trump-cia-was-arming-afghan-rebels-before-soviets-invaded/),
leader of the
[Hezb-e-Islami](https://www.dni.gov/nctc/groups/hezb_e_islami.html),
arguably the most extreme of the
[mujahedeen](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2019/01/07/history-trump-cia-was-arming-afghan-rebels-before-soviets-invaded/)
groups, who is now
[negotiating](https://www.usnews.com/news/world/articles/2021-08-16/afghanistans-hekmatyar-says-heading-for-doha-with-karzai-abdullah-abdullah-to-meet-taliban-al-jazeera)
with the Taliban, perhaps angling for a spot in its new government.

Osama Bin Laden's links with Afghanistan can also be traced to the
anti-Soviet war. He achieved his fame thanks to his role in that
American-backed *jihad* and, along with other Arabs involved in it,
founded al-Qaeda in 1988. Later, he decamped to
[Sudan](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/oct/17/afghanistan.terrorism3),
but after American officials demanded his expulsion, moved, in 1996,
back to Afghanistan, a natural haven given his renown there.

Though the Taliban, unlike al-Qaeda, never had a transnational Islamist
agenda, they couldn't deny him succor --- and not just because of his
cachet. A main tenet of *Pashtunwali,* the Pashtun social code they
lived by, was the duty to provide refuge
([*nanawati*](https://www.baltimoresun.com/opinion/bs-xpm-2010-03-02-bal-op-pashtun02mar02-story.html))
to those seeking it. Mullah Mohammad Omar, the Taliban's supreme leader,
became increasingly perturbed by Bin Laden's incendiary
[messages](https://irp.fas.org/world/para/docs/980223-fatwa.htm)
proclaiming it "an individual duty for every Muslim" to kill Americans,
including civilians, and [personally
implored](https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/The-Rise-and-Fall-of-Osama-bin-Laden/Peter-L-Bergen/9781982170523)
him to stop, but to no avail. The Taliban were stuck with him.

Now, fast forward a couple of decades. American leaders certainly didn't
create the Islamic State-Khorasan Province --- aka IS-K, an affiliate of
the main Islamic State --- whose suicide bombers killed 170 people at
Kabul airport on August 26th, 13 of them American troops. Yet IS-K and
its parent body emerged partly from the ideological
[evolution](https://www.jstor.org/stable/26351173?seq=6#metadata_info_tab_contents)
of various extremists, including many [Taliban
commanders](https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/SR395-The-Rise-and-Stall-of-the-Islamic-State-in-Afghanistan.pdf),
who had fought the Soviets. Later, inspired, especially after the 2003
U.S. invasion of Iraq, to continue the jihad, they yearned for something
[bolder](https://www.csis.org/programs/transnational-threats-project/past-projects/terrorism-backgrounders/islamic-state-khorasan)
and more ambitious than the Taliban's version, which was confined to
Afghanistan.

It should hardly have required clairvoyance in the 1980s to grasp that
funding an anti-Soviet Islamist insurgency might have dangerous
long-term consequences. After all, the mujahedeen were hardly secretive
about the sort of political system and society they envisaged for their
country.

**Lesson Two: Beware the Overwhelming Pride Produced by the Possession
of Unrivaled Global Power**

The idea that the U.S. could topple the Taliban and create a new state
and society in Afghanistan was outlandish considering that country's
history. But after the Soviet Union started to wobble and eventually
collapsed and the Cold War was won, Washington was giddy with optimism.
Recall the paeans in those years to "[the unipolar
moment](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/1990-01-01/unipolar-moment)"
and "[the end of history](https://www.jstor.org/stable/24027184)." We
were Number One, which meant that the possibilities, including remaking
entire countries, were limitless.

The response to the 9/11 attacks then wasn't simply a matter of [shock
and
fear](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/08/26/robert-kagan-afghanistan-americans-forget/).
Only one person in Washington urged reflection and humility in that
moment. On September 14, 2001, as Congress prepared to authorize a war
against al-Qaeda and its allies (the Taliban), Representative Barbara
Lee (D-CA) gave a prescient
[speech](https://www.washingtonpost.com/history/2021/08/17/barbara-lee-afghanistan-vote/).
"I know," she said, "this resolution will pass, although we all know
that the president can wage a war even without it. However... let's step
back for a moment... and think through the implications of our actions
today, so that this does not spiral out of control." 

In the heat of that moment, in a country that had become a military
power beyond compare, no one cared to consider alternative responses to
the al-Qaeda attacks. Lee's would be the lone no vote against that
Authorization to Use Military Force. Afterward, she would
[receive](https://www.washingtonpost.com/history/2021/08/17/barbara-lee-afghanistan-vote/)
hate mail, even death threats.

So confident was Washington that it rejected the Taliban's
[offer](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/oct/14/afghanistan.terrorism5)
to discuss surrendering Bin Laden to a third country if the U.S. stopped
the bombing and provided proof of his responsibility for 9/11. Secretary
of State Donald Rumsfeld also refused to consider the Taliban's
leadership attempts to negotiate a [surrender and
amnesty](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/23/world/middleeast/afghanistan-taliban-deal-united-states.html).
The Bush administration treated the Taliban and al-Qaeda as identical
and
[excluded](https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/The-Afghanistan-Papers/Craig-Whitlock/9781982159009)
the former from the December 2001 Bonn talks it had convened to form a
new Afghan government. As it happened, the Taliban, never having
received the memo from various
[eminences](https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v43/n17/thomas-meaney/like-ordering-pizza)
who pronounced it dead, soon regrouped and revved up its insurgency.

The United States then faced two choices, neither of them good. Its top
officials could have decided that the government they had created in
Kabul wouldn't survive and simply withdrawn their forces. Or they could
have stuck with nation-building and periodically "surged" troops into
the country in hopes that a viable government and army would eventually
emerge. They chose the latter.  No president or senior military
commander wanted to be blamed for "losing" Afghanistan or the "war on
terror," so the baton was passed from one commander to the next and one
administration to another, each claiming to have made significant
progress. The result: a 20-year,
[\$2.3-trillion](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/human-and-budgetary-costs-date-us-war-afghanistan-2001-2022)
fiasco that ended chaotically at Kabul airport.

**Lesson Three: Don't Assume That Opponents Whose Values Don't Fit Yours
Won't Be** **Supported Locally **

Reporting on the Taliban's retrograde beliefs and pitiless practices
helped foster the belief that such a group, itself supposedly a
Pakistani creation, could be routed because Afghans reviled it.
Moreover, the bulk of the dealings American officials and senior
military leaders had were with educated, urbane Afghan men and women,
and that strengthened their view that the Taliban lacked legitimacy
while the U.S.-backed government had growing public confidence.

Had the Taliban truly been a foreign transplant, however, they could
never have kept fighting, dying, and recruiting new members for nearly
two decades in opposition to a government and army backed by the world's
sole superpower. The Taliban certainly inspired fear and committed
numerous acts of brutality and horror, but poor rural Pashtuns, their
social base, didn't view them as outsiders with strange beliefs and
customs, but as part of the local social fabric.  

Mullah Omar, the Taliban's first supreme leader, was born in Kandahar
Province and raised in Uruzgun Province. His father, Moulavi Ghulam
Nabi, had been respected locally for his learning. Omar became the
[leader](https://unherd.com/2021/08/afghanistan-always-defeats-the-west/)
of the Hotaki tribe, part of one of the two main Pashtun tribal
confederacies, the Ghilzai, which was a Taliban mainstay.  He joined the
war against the Soviet occupation in 1979, returning to Kandahar once it
ended, where he ran a *madrassa*, or religious school. After the Taliban
took power in 1996, though its leader, he remained in Kandahar, seldom
visiting the capital.

The Kabul government and its American patrons may have inadvertently
helped the Taliban's cause. The more that ordinary Afghans experienced
the raging corruption of the American-created system and the viciousness
of the [paramilitary forces,
militias](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2019/Costs%20of%20War%2C%20CIA%20Afghanistan_Aug%2021%2C%202019.pdf),
and
[warlords](https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/09/19/afghanistan-reconstruction-derailed-us-support-warlords)
the U.S. military [relied
on](https://www.hrw.org/news/2021/07/06/how-us-funded-abuses-led-failure-afghanistan),
the more successful the insurgents were at portraying themselves as the
country's true nationalists resisting foreign occupiers and their
collaborators. Not for nothing did the Taliban
[liken](http://www.afghan-bios.info/flash-analysis.html?id=40&task=view&total=36&start=8)
Afghanistan's U.S.-supported presidents to Shah Shuja, an exiled Afghan
monarch the invading British placed on the throne, triggering an armed
uprising that lasted from 1839 to 1842 and ended with British troops
suffering a catastrophic defeat. 

But who needed history? Certainly not the greatest power ever.

**Lesson Four: Beware the Generals, Contractors, Consultants, and
Advisers Who Eternally Issue Cheery Reports From War Zones**

The managers of wars and economic projects acquire a vested interest in
touting their "successes" (even when they know quite well that they're
actually failures). Generals worry about their professional reputations,
nation-builders about losing lucrative government contracts.

Senior American commanders repeatedly assured the president and Congress
that the Afghan army was becoming a thoroughly professional fighting
force, even when they knew better. (If you doubt this, just read the
[scathing
analysis](https://info.publicintelligence.net/USArmy-Dereliction-of-Duty-II.pdf)
of retired Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Davis, who did two tours of duty in
Afghanistan.)

Reporter Craig Whitlock's [*Afghanistan
Papers*](https://www.amazon.com/Afghanistan-Papers-Secret-History-War/dp/1982159006/ref=tmm_hrd_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1630351386&sr=1-3)
--- based on a trove of once-private documents as well as extensive
interviews with numerous American officials --- contains endless example
of such happy talk. After serving 19 months leading U.S. and allied
forces in Afghanistan, General John Allen declared that the Afghan army
could hold its own, adding that "this is what winning looks like."
[General John
Campbell](https://www.army.mil/article/156517/operation_freedoms_sentinel_and_our_continued_security_investment_in_afghanistan),
who held the same position during the last quarter of 2015, praised
those troops as a "capable" and "modern, professional force." American
generals [constantly
talked](https://tomdispatch.com/engelhardt-whistling-past-the-graveyard-of-empires/)
about corners being turned.

Torrents of data were cited to tout the social and economic progress
produced by American aid. It mattered not at all that
[reports](https://www.sigar.mil/pdf/lessonslearned/SIGAR-21-46-LL.pdf)
by the Special Inspector General for Afghan Reconstruction questioned
the [readiness and
capabilities](https://www.sigar.mil/pdf/lessonslearned/sigar-17-62-ll.pdf)
of the Afghan army, while
[uncovering](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/12/09/world/middleeast/afghanistan-war-cost.html)
information about schools and hospitals funded but never built, or built
but never used, or
"[unsafe](https://www.sigar.mil/pdf/testimony/SIGAR-14-46-TY.pdf),"
"[literally
crumbling](https://www.sigar.mil/pdf/testimony/SIGAR-14-46-TY.pdf)," or
saddled with unsustainable [operating
costs](https://www.sigar.mil/pdf/testimony/SIGAR-14-46-TY.pdf).
Staggering sums of American aid were also lost to systemic corruption.
U.S.-funded fuel supplies were typically stolen on a "[massive
scale](https://www.sigar.mil/pdf/speeches/SIGAR_IWA_Speech_2020-06-24.pdf)"
and sold on the black market.  

Afghan commanders padded payrolls with thousands of "ghost soldiers,"
pocketing the cash as they often did the salaries of [unpaid actual
soldiers](https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2021/08/why-afghanistans-security-forces-suddenly-collapsed.html).
The economic aid that American commander [General David
Petraeus](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/03/07/the-man-who-made-millions-off-the-afghan-war)
wanted ramped up because he considered it essential to victory fueled
bribe-taking by officials managing basic services. That, in turn, only
added to the mistrust of the U.S.-backed government by ordinary
citizens.

Have policymakers learned any lessons from the Afghan War? President
Biden did
[declare](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/08/31/biden-addresses-the-end-of-the-us-war-in-afghanistan.html)
an end to this country's "forever wars" and its nation-building (though
not to its [anti-terror
strategy](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/15/us/politics/united-states-al-qaeda-afghanistan.html)
driven by drone attacks and commando raids). Real change, however, won't
happen until the vast national security establishment and
military-industrial complex nourished by the post-9/11 commitment to the
war on terror, regime change, and nation building reaches a similar
conclusion. And only a wild optimist could believe that likely.

Here, then, is the simplest lesson of all: no matter how powerful your
country may be, your wishes are not necessarily the world's desires and
you probably understand a lot less than you think.

Copyright 2021 Rajan Menon

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [Rajan Menon](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/rajanmenon/)

**Rajan Menon**, a
[*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/the-graveyard-of-empires-redux/)[
regular](https://tomdispatch.com/the-graveyard-of-empires-redux/), is
the Anne and Bernard Spitzer Professor of International Relations at the
Powell School, City College of New York, Senior Research Fellow at
Columbia University's Saltzman Institute of War and Peace Studies, and a
non-resident fellow at the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft.
He is the author, most recently, of [*The Conceit of Humanitarian
Intervention*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0199384878/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

Thanks to TomDispatch.com, where this article originally appeared.
