# "The Greatest Fighting Force in Human History"

### The Perpetual Wars You Aren\'t Supposed to Notice

![](bush-mission-accomplished.jpg){class="a"}


By [*William J. Astore*](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

In his message to the troops prior to the July 4th weekend, Secretary of
Defense Lloyd Austin offered high praise indeed. "We have the greatest
fighting force in human history," he tweeted, connecting that claim to
the U.S. having patriots of all colors, creeds, and backgrounds "who
bravely volunteer to defend our country and our values."

As a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel from a working-class
background who volunteered to serve more than four decades ago, who am I
to argue with Austin? Shouldn't I just bask in the glow of his praise
for today's troops, reflecting on my own honorable service near the end
of what now must be thought of as the First Cold War?

[]{#anchor}Yet I confess to having doubts. I've heard it all before. The
hype. The hyperbole. I still remember how, soon after the 9/11 attacks,
President George W. Bush
[boasted](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/174957) that this country had
"[the greatest
force](https://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/22/washington/w23policytext.html)
for human liberation the world has ever known." I also remember how, in
a pep talk given to U.S. troops in Afghanistan in 2010, President Barack
Obama [declared](http://www.tomdispatch.com/archive/175337) them "the
finest fighting force that the world has ever known." And yet, 15 years
ago at *TomDispatch*, I was already
[wondering](http://www.tomdispatch.com/archive/175337) when Americans
had first become so proud of, and insistent upon, declaring our military
the world's absolute best, a force beyond compare, and what that meant
for a republic that once had viewed large standing armies and constant
warfare as [anathemas to
freedom](https://bracingviews.com/2013/06/28/no-nation-can-preserve-its-freedom-in-the-midst-of-continual-warfare/).

In retrospect, the answer is all too straightforward: we need
*something* to boast about, don't we? In the once-upon-a-time
"[exceptional
nation](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2019/01/yes-america-can-still-lead-the-world/576427/),"
what else is there to praise to the skies or consider our pride and joy
these days except [our
heroes](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-wars-don-t-make-heroes/)?
After all, this country can no longer boast of having anything like the
world's best educational outcomes, or healthcare system, or the most
advanced and safest infrastructure, or the best democratic politics, so
we better damn well be able to boast about having "the greatest fighting
force" ever.

Leaving that boast aside, Americans could certainly brag about one thing
this country has beyond compare: the [most
expensive](https://tomdispatch.com/congress-has-been-captured-by-the-arms-industry/)
military around and possibly ever. No country even comes close to our
commitment of funds to wars, weapons (including nuclear ones at the
Department of Energy), and global dominance. Indeed, the Pentagon's
budget for "defense" in 2023 exceeds that of the [next 10
countries](https://www.pgpf.org/blog/2023/04/the-united-states-spends-more-on-defense-than-the-next-10-countries-combined#:~:text=April%2024%2C%202023-,The%20United%20States%20Spends%20More%20on%20Defense%20than%20the%20Next,Peace%20Research%20Institute%20(SIPRI).)
(mostly allies!) combined.

And from all of this, it seems to me, two questions arise: Are we truly
getting what we pay so dearly for --- the bestest, finest, most
exceptional military ever? And even if we are, should a self-proclaimed
democracy really want such a thing?

The answer to both those questions is, of course, no. After all, America
hasn't won a war in a convincing fashion since 1945. If this country
keeps losing wars routinely and often enough catastrophically, as it has
in places like Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq, how can we honestly say
that we possess the world's greatest fighting force? And if we
nevertheless persist in such a boast, doesn't that echo the rhetoric of
militaristic empires of the past? (Remember when we used to think that
only unhinged dictators like Adolf Hitler boasted of having peerless
warriors in a megalomaniacal pursuit of global domination?)

Actually, I do believe the United States has the most exceptional
military, just not in the way its boosters and cheerleaders like Austin,
Bush, and Obama claimed. How is the U.S. military truly "exceptional"?
Let me count the ways.

**The Pentagon as a Budgetary Black Hole**

In so many ways, the U.S. military is indeed exceptional. Let's begin
with its budget. At this very moment, Congress is debating a colossal
"defense" budget of \$886 billion for FY2024 (and all the debate is
[about
issues](https://www.politico.com/news/2023/07/27/senate-oks-defense-bill-setting-up-clash-with-house-over-abortion-lgbtq-measures-00108682)
that have little to do with the military). That defense spending bill,
you may recall, was "only" \$740 billion when President Joe Biden took
office three years ago. In 2021, Biden withdrew U.S. forces from the
disastrous war in Afghanistan, theoretically saving the taxpayer nearly
\$50 billion a year. Yet, in place of any sort of peace dividend,
American taxpayers simply got an even higher bill as the Pentagon budget
continued to soar.

Recall that, in his four years in office, Donald Trump increased
military spending by 20%. Biden is now poised to achieve a similar 20%
increase in [just three
years](https://stephensemler.substack.com/p/reversing-a-146b-military-buildup)
in office. And that increase largely doesn't even include the cost of
supporting Ukraine in its war with Russia --- so far, somewhere between
[\$120
billion](https://www.crfb.org/blogs/congress-approved-113-billion-aid-ukraine-2022)
and \$200 billion and still rising.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Colossal budgets for weapons and war enjoy broad bipartisan support in
Washington. It's almost as if there were a
[military-industrial-congressional
complex](https://tomdispatch.com/can-the-military-industrial-complex-be-tamed/)
at work here! Where, in fact, did I ever hear a president warning us
about that? Oh, perhaps I'm thinking of a certain [farewell
address](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OyBNmecVtdU) by Dwight D.
Eisenhower in 1961.

In all seriousness, there's now a huge pentagonal-shaped black hole on
the Potomac that's devouring more than half of the federal discretionary
budget annually. Even when Congress and the Pentagon allegedly try to
enforce fiscal discipline, if not austerity elsewhere, the crushing
gravitational pull of that hole just continues to [suck
in](https://tomdispatch.com/the-ultimate-all-american-slush-fund/) more
money. Bet on that continuing as the Pentagon issues ever more warnings
about a [new cold
war](https://tomdispatch.com/arsenal-of-democracy-or-simply-an-arsenal/)
with China and Russia.

Given its money-sucking nature, perhaps you won't be surprised to learn
that the Pentagon is remarkably exceptional when it comes to failing
fiscal audits --- five of them in a row (the fifth failure being a
"[teachable
moment](https://thehill.com/policy/defense/3740921-defense-department-fails-another-audit-but-makes-progress/),"
according to its chief financial officer) --- as its budget only
continued to soar. Whether you're talking about lost wars or failed
audits, the Pentagon is eternally rewarded for its failures. Try running
a "Mom and Pop" store on that basis and see how long you last.

Speaking of all those failed wars, perhaps you won't be surprised to
learn that they haven't come cheaply. According to the [Costs of War
Project](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/) at Brown University,
roughly [937,000
people](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/WarDeathToll)
have died since 9/11/2001 thanks to direct violence in this country's
"Global War on Terror" in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and elsewhere. (And
the deaths of another [3.6 to 3.7 million
people](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/IndirectDeaths)
may be indirectly attributable to those same post-9/11 conflicts.) The
financial cost to the American taxpayer has been roughly [\$8
trillion](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/BudgetaryCosts)
and rising even as the U.S. military continues its counterterror
preparations and activities in [85
countries](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2021/USCounterterrorismOperations).

No other nation in the world sees its military as (to borrow from a
short-lived [Navy
slogan](https://www.npr.org/2015/06/13/414239773/why-the-navy-abandoned-its-latest-slogan))
"a global force for good." No other nation divides the whole world into
military commands like
[AFRICOM](https://tomdispatch.com/getting-to-yes/) for Africa and
CENTCOM for the Middle East and parts of Central and South Asia, headed
up by four-star generals and admirals. No other nation has a network of
[750 foreign
bases](https://www.amazon.com/Base-Nation-Military-Abroad-America/dp/1510728813/ref=bracingviews-20)
scattered across the globe. No other nation strives for full-spectrum
dominance through "[all-domain
operations](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/all-domain-operations-hubris-unleashed),"
meaning not only the control of traditional "domains" of combat --- the
land, sea, and air --- but also of space and cyberspace. While other
countries are focused mainly on national defense (or regional
aggressions of one sort or another), the U.S. military strives for total
global and spatial dominance. Truly exceptional!

Strangely, in this never-ending, unbounded pursuit of dominance, results
simply don't matter. The Afghan War? Bungled, botched, and lost. The
Iraq War? Built on lies and lost. Libya? [We came, we
saw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6DXDU48RHLU), Libya's leader (and
so many innocents) died. Yet no one at the Pentagon was punished for any
of those failures. In fact, to this day, it remains an
accountability-free zone, exempt from meaningful oversight. If you're a
"[modern major
general](https://www.classical-music.com/features/articles/modern-major-general-lyrics/),"
why not pursue wars when you know you'll [never be
punished](http://armedforcesjournal.com/a-failure-in-generalship/) for
losing them?

Indeed, the few "exceptions" within the
military-industrial-congressional complex who stood up for
accountability, people of principle like Daniel Hale, Chelsea Manning,
and Edward Snowden, were imprisoned or exiled. In fact, the U.S.
government has even conspired to imprison a foreign publisher and
transparency activist, Julian Assange, who published the truth about the
American war on terror, by using a World War I-era espionage clause that
only applies to American citizens.

And the record is even grimmer than that. In our post-9/11 years at war,
as President Barack Obama
[admitted](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QBLNohqquRk), "We tortured
some folks" --- and the only person punished for that was another
whistleblower, [John
Kiriakou](https://www.democracynow.org/2015/2/9/exclusive_freed_cia_whistleblower_john_kiriakou),
who did his best to bring those [war
crimes](http://www.niemanwatchdog.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=ask_this.view&askthisid=386)
to our attention.

And speaking of war crimes, isn't it "exceptional" that the U.S.
military plans to spend upwards of \$2 trillion in the coming decades on
a new generation of [genocidal nuclear
weapons](https://tomdispatch.com/peace-is-not-our-profession/)? Those
include new stealth bombers and new intercontinental ballistic missiles
(ICBMs) for the Air Force, as well as new nuclear-missile-firing
submarines for the Navy. Worse yet, the U.S. continues to [reserve the
right](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2022-04/news/biden-policy-allows-first-use-nuclear-weapons)
to use nuclear weapons first, presumably in the name of protecting life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. And of course, despite the
countries ---
[nine](https://www.icanw.org/how_many_countries_have_nuclear_weapons_and_how_many_are_there)!
--- that now possess nukes, the U.S. remains the only one to have used
them in wartime, in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

Finally, it turns out that the military is even immune from Supreme
Court decisions! When SCOTUS recently overturned affirmative action for
college admission, it carved out [an
exception](https://www.thenation.com/article/politics/affirmative-action-military-academies/)
for the military academies. Schools like West Point and Annapolis can
still consider the race of their applicants, presumably to [promote unit
cohesion](https://www.thenation.com/article/society/supreme-court-affirmative-action-military-academies/)
through proportional representation of minorities within the officer
ranks, but our society at large apparently does not require racial
equity for its cohesion.

**A Most Exceptional Military Makes Its Wars and Their Ugliness
Disappear**

Here's one of my favorite lines from the movie [*The Usual
Suspects*](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0114814/?ref_=tt_ch)*: "*The
greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing the world he did not
exist." The greatest trick the U.S. military ever pulled was essentially
convincing us that its wars never existed. As Norman Solomon notes in
his revealing book, [*War Made
Invisible*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1620977915/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
the military-industrial-congressional complex has excelled at
camouflaging the [atrocious
realities](https://bracingviews.com/2017/10/11/the-atrocious-nature-of-the-vietnam-war/)
of war, rendering them almost entirely invisible to the American people.
Call it the [new American
isolationism](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-the-face-of-war-don-t-look/),
only this time we're isolated from the harrowing and horrific costs of
war itself.

America is a nation perpetually at war, yet most of us live our lives
with little or no perception of this. There is no longer a military
draft. There are no war bond drives. You aren't asked to make direct and
personal sacrifices. You aren't even asked to pay attention, let alone
pay (except for those nearly trillion-dollar-a-year budgets and interest
payments on a ballooning national debt, of course). You certainly aren't
asked for your permission for this country to fight its wars, as the
[Constitution
demands](https://contraryperspective.com/2015/01/12/why-america-keeps-losing-its-wars/).
As President George W. Bush suggested after the 9/11 attacks, [go visit
Disneyworld](https://transcripts.cnn.com/show/smn/date/2001-10-06/segment/26)!
Enjoy life! Let America's "best and brightest" handle the brutality, the
degradation, and the ugliness of war, bright minds like former Vice
President Dick
("[So?](https://archive.nytimes.com/thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/03/19/cheney-unconcerned-by-iraq-wars-unpopularity/)")
Cheney and former Secretary of Defense Donald ("[I don't do
quagmires](https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/06/30/donald-rumsfeld-iraq-war-architect-dead-at-88/)")
Rumsfeld.

Did you hear something about the U.S. military being in
[Syria](https://www.washingtonpost.com/powerpost/senate-backs-mcconnells-rebuke-of-trumps-military-drawdown-plans-in-syria-afghanistan/2019/01/31/5812d058-2584-11e9-90cd-dedb0c92dc17_story.html)?
In [Somalia](https://airwars.org/conflict/us-forces-in-somalia/)? Did
you hear about the U.S. military supporting the Saudis in a brutal war
of repression in
[Yemen](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-29319423)? Did you
notice how this country's military interventions around the world kill,
wound, and displace so many people of color, so much so that observers
speak of the [systemic
racism](https://www.salon.com/2023/06/27/americas-systemic-racism-isnt-just-domestic-consider-dies-around-the-world-in-our/)
of America's wars? Is it truly progress that a more diverse military in
terms of "color, creed, and background," to use Secretary of Defense
Austin's words, has killed and is killing so many non-white peoples
around the globe?

Praising the
[all-female-crewed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MnJyGSMUt2E) flyover
at the last Super Bowl or painting [rainbow
flags](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/us-foreign-policy-in-one-image)
of inclusivity (or even blue and yellow flags [for
Ukraine](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/praise-the-lord-and-pass-the-cluster))
on [cluster
munitions](https://tomdispatch.com/the-united-states-refuses-to-play-by-the-worlds-rules/)
won't soften the blows or quiet the screams. As one reader of my blog
[Bracing Views](https://bracingviews.substack.com/) so aptly put it:
"The diversity the war parties \[Democrats and Republicans\] will not
tolerate is diversity of thought."

Of course, the U.S. military isn't solely to blame here. Senior officers
will claim their duty is not to make policy at all but to salute smartly
as the president and Congress order them about. The reality, however, is
different. The military is, in fact, at the core of America's [shadow
government](https://www.amazon.com/Shadow-Government-Surveillance-Security-Single-Superpower/dp/1608463656/ref=bracingviews-20)
with enormous influence over policymaking. It's not merely an instrument
of power; it is power --- and exceptionally powerful at that. And that
form of power simply isn't conducive to liberty and freedom, whether
inside America's borders or beyond them.

Wait! What am I saying? Stop thinking about all that! America is, after
all, the exceptional nation and its military, a band of freedom
fighters. In Iraq, where war and sanctions killed untold numbers of
Iraqi children in the 1990s, the sacrifice was "[worth
it](https://www.newsweek.com/watch-madeleine-albright-saying-iraqi-kids-deaths-worth-it-resurfaces-1691193),"
as former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright once reassured Americans
on *60 Minutes*.

Even when government actions kill children, lots of children, it's for
the greater good. If this troubles you, go to Disney and take your kids
with you. You don't like Disney? Then, hark back to that [old marching
song](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pack_Up_Your_Troubles_in_Your_Old_Kit-Bag)
of World War I and "pack up your troubles in your old kit-bag, and
smile, smile, smile." Remember, America's troops are freedom-delivering
heroes and your job is to smile and support them without question.

Have I made my point? I hope so. And yes, the U.S. military is indeed
exceptional and being so, being #1 (or claiming you are anyway) means
never having to say you're sorry, no matter how many innocents you kill
or maim, how many lives you disrupt and destroy, how many lies you tell.

I must admit, though, that, despite the endless celebration of our
military's exceptionalism and "greatness," a fragment of scripture from
my Catholic upbringing haunts me still: *Pride goeth before destruction
and a haughty spirit before a fall*.

Copyright 2023 William J. Astore

Featured image:
[Pentagon](https://flickr.com/photos/thomashawk/49388710608/in/photolist-2ifj3Zf-4m7mNY-2aVmrKp-2hA1KrW-h3Njrb-5nCVG5-Sybg3-5nCVPN-5nCVZs-5nyFxg-9DBbv6-2dbhsgE-9DBcnk-nED7d-2gufNGK-4m3it4-h3Njmm-h3K5NC-5mwBzz-3ieJbc-5mB3ZJ-2jXAADb-2mHbbGa-2jzj2rU-5mwApM-2iWFfC7-buT6p9-9DE43G-61quXV-6SAS2a-5mAUn1-5mB3kb-5mB2qN-5mAVcw-5mB4Cz-5mwCTK-5mARUW-s5U5kf-5mwFLF-4RTEy-5mwzqe-sns844-5VSUed-8fww25-xwwCtX-5nvr7f-zRRuK-bqdDQL-2mYXYKT-5kPXVz)
by [Thomas Hawk](https://flickr.com/photos/thomashawk/) is licensed
under [CC BY-NC 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/) /
Flickr

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[*Songlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[*Every Body Has a
Story*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[*In the Shadows of the American Century:
The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[*The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since
World War
II*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
and Ann Jones's *[*They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

**William J. Astore**, a retired lieutenant colonel (USAF) and
professor of history, is
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/are-the-best-years-of-my-country-behind-me/)[ regular ](https://tomdispatch.com/are-the-best-years-of-my-country-behind-me/)and
a senior fellow at the Eisenhower Media Network (EMN), an organization
of critical veteran military and national security professionals. His
personal substack is [*Bracing Views*](https://bracingviews.com/).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com)
