
# Blonde Noir

![Woman by Willem Kooning](woman-kooning.jpeg){class="a"}

## by DC Diamondopolous

Kit Covington sat on the sofa in her Pacific Palisades mansion with a
cigarette lodged in the side of her mouth. A cloud of smoke floated
around her head. She adjusted the oxygen tube in her nose, then brushed
ash from her dog Muffin's champagne-colored curls. The miniature poodle
dozing in Kit's lap startled when the camera crew from *The Great
Morning Talk Show *banged equipment into Kit's antique furniture.

"Watch it! You scratch anything, you'll pay for the restoration."
Since her left lung had been removed, Kit's husky voice had a rattle
that lingered between words chaining them together like loose ball
bearings.

"Sorry," the stocky, tattooed sound woman said.

Kit wondered if the all-female crew was a set-up---some kind of
knife-twisting in the gut. She'd been anxious about the interview and
now regretted it.

Her son, Robin, urged her to confront the nonsense. The 1950s blonde
bombshell became notorious because of some damn youtube video a pop
singer made by superimposing Kit's dance sequence from the 1956 movie,
*I Was a Teenage SheWolf From Mars*, while he sang to her. It went
viral. Paramount capitalized on it with a box set of her films. The
Screen Actors Guild sent her checks she hadn't seen in sixty years.

Kit would have laughed at the male juvenile obsession with her big
breasts, platinum blonde hair, and erotic gyrations in her bullet bra
and tight sequined space suit. But it happened at the time actresses
came forward and named producers, directors, and actors who raped and
assaulted them. The video ignited a firestorm of criticism from young
women, who blamed her for their being sexualized. She became the
poster girl, Adam's Eve, the anti-feminist, the target for all the
ills cast upon womanhood---making her name *Kit *into a verb
synonymous with "fucks for favors."

What a load of shit!

Kit had had enough after months of headlines, *CNN* pestering her old
studio for her telephone number, and the tabloids offering money to
anyone who had a recent picture of her.

Centerfolds, headshots, movie-posters, her sexy blonde images from the
50s were everywhere.

She chose *The Great Morning Talk Show *because Bridget Lundgren, the
lawyer turned TV host, defended her on the show.

Muffin jumped from Kit's lap and wolfed a piece of jelly donut the
beefy, spiked- haired, lighting woman had dropped.

"This isn't a barn! Use a napkin. That's a three-hundred-year-old
Persian rug," Kit said.

"Sorry, Miss Covington."

Kit watched Lundgren scrutinize the pictures on the wall. She was a
real fashion plate in a navy pantsuit, with her short blonde hair
tucked behind her ears. Kit tensed when the woman took a photograph
from her carnival days off the wall and examined it, revealing a
yellow nicotine outline. How dare she!

"Is this from the Gerling Carnival?" Lundgren asked.

"Could be," Kit said surprised that Lundgren knew about her carny
days.

Lundgren replaced it and moved to the photo of Kit riding bareback in
*The Barnum and Bailey Greatest Show on Earth, *where she performed
flips until she fell from the horse and broke her ankle.

Above the walk-in fireplace, Lundgren gazed at the huge painting of
Kit by Willem deKooning. It was Kit's favorite, by the artist who
inspired her to take up painting. Completed in 1958 when she was
twenty-five, the painting recalled the memory of sitting for hours,
her back arched, her tits pointing to the North Star, pouty full lips,
a halo of platinum blonde hair, and the moist come-hither look women
still use to lure men into the bedroom.

"This is one of the few deKoonings I've seen that isn't an abstract,"
Lundgren said.

"He did others."

"My favorite was the *Woman *series. I love how he broke rules."

Kit puffed on her cigarette and flicked ash into a large serving dish
sitting next to her. She wondered how much of the art world Lundgren
knew. In person, Kit judged her as a cool and calculating woman, the
way she inspected the pictures as if they hid the da Vinci code. Why
not ask how all the hullabaloo affected her, how it made her
irritable, critical, bitchy. She wondered if Lundgren had gone so far
as to play nice-nice on TV---knowing Kit would be watching.

Outside the sliding screen door, she saw Robin watering the rose
bushes. Since the operation, he'd been pestering her to stop smoking.
She cut back from a four packs a day, to two and a half. What the hell
did he want? She'd been smoking since she was ten. When he tried to
scare her with images on his phone of how the cancer could spread to
the liver and kidneys, she grabbed the phone and threw it at him. She
made him swear that when she died, he'd put her in a box, stick a
cigarette in her mouth---preferably lit---and prod a lighter in her
right hand.

"I can go without oxygen for four minutes," Kit said. "So break. I
don't want these damn tubes on camera. I'll need a cigarette---."

"Your son told us."

Miffed by Lundgren's rudeness, Kit said, "When do we start?"

"In five minutes. Do you need to use the restroom?"

"My legs are cramping." Kit struggled to rise, shooing Lundgren away
when she tried to help. She stood and rolled the oxygen tank she
called Sherman across the living room floor while pulling a pack of
Winstons and a lighter from the pocket of her long flowing gypsy
skirt.

"Aren't you afraid of the tank exploding?" the sound woman asked as
Kit wobbled by.

"No, I'm not. If I could walk a tightrope while on my period, I can
roll a damn dolly while smoking a ciggie."

The girl raised her eyebrows and turned away.

Robin saw her and slid open the screen.

"I don't want to do this," Kit said. "That woman's going to ambush
me."

"C'mon mom, you liked her."

"Not anymore. She snapped at me, '*Your son told us,'"* she mimicked.

Kit pushed past Robin and stood above her tiered English garden. Even
with her fading sense of smell, she caught fragrances of her lemon and
peach trees. Below the garden was a view overlooking Highway 1,
Malibu, and the Pacific Ocean. She had bought the house in the fifties
while pregnant with Robin and married his father Daniel soon after.

The April morning glistened as Catalina Island sat like a treasured
cast-off from the mainland. Cast-off. When Kit hit her late twenties,
it was over. No producer wanted to hire an old hag at thirty. Her
agent got her jobs on TV, as a panel member on *To Tell the Truth,
I've Got a Secret, *and her big whoop-de-doo, the center box on
*Hollywood Squares.* In the 1970s, her agent dropped her.

"You signed a contract, Mom. Let people hear your story." He peered
into the living room. "They're ready for your close-up."

Kit rolled her eyes. Robin was always quoting from *Sunset Blvd.*,
*The Wizard of Oz, *or *All About Eve. *On occasion he'd dress in drag
and perform dance numbers from *Cabaret, A Chorus Line,* and musicals
she never heard of. Her boy knew how to make her laugh.

Kit counted five strangers in her house, eating, drinking coffee,
moving her furniture, and using her bathroom. Well, at least they were
women and wouldn't be pissing on the floor.

"We're ready, Miss Covington," the sound woman yelled.

"C'mon, Mom. It'll be fun."

"I look like an old beatnik."

"You are* *an old beatnik."

Kit's chuckle rumbled like a truck bouncing over potholes. She
smoothed her long white hair with her ciggie hand. She hadn't worn
lipstick or make-up in years. She lived in sandals and, before the
operation, went barefoot.

Robin waited for Kit to enter, then slid the door behind him. Kit
rolled Sherman to the couch and settled in. Muffin jumped in her lap
and Jezebel the cat slinked around the sofa and nestled beside Kit.

"We'll open with the video," Lundgren said. "then cutaway for the
interview."

"Why show that again?"

"It's the reason for the interview, Miss Covington."

How sucky, Kit thought. She wasn't ashamed. She just didn't like
having to defend herself.

"Everyone in the world has seen it."

"It's a lead in," Lundgren said.

Kit scowled at Robin. He came over and straightened the string of
turquoise and silver beads that dangled from her neck.

"Quit fussing."

"Come out, come out, wherever you are and meet the young lady, who
fell from a star," Robin whispered.

"Glinda the Good Witch," Kit mumbled.

Robin winked at her.

"Ready when you are, Bridget," the camerawoman said.

"Good morning. Today, we have a very special guest. Kit Covington. In
case you've been living under a rock the last several months,"
Lundgren smiled, "we're going to play the video that's caused a
sensation. Here's the Grammy-winning pop star, Walker, singing from
the hit video, "You're My Dream Girl in the Night" along with Kit
Covington from her movie, *I Was a Teenage SheWolf from Mars.*"

The video played on a small monitor. Kit watched herself from the 1956
horror movie, dancing, spinning, cleavage bouncing, her generous ass
stretching the satin on her sequined spacesuit. It was hard to imagine
her wrinkled and shriveled body once had so much oomph and had been so
sexy.

She took off the tube and laid it beside her.

The camerawoman pointed her finger, and Lundgren began.

"We're sitting in the home of Kit Covington, a movie actress known as
the Queen of the Bs from the 1950s, who has become infamous for being
the poster-girl for the sexualization of generations of women."

"That's a load of shit!" Kit said. "Why blame me? Women have always
used their bodies to get what they want. As if women didn't fuck
before 1956."

Lundgren's jaw dropped. Seconds went by before she made the
throat-slash sign with her hand.

Kit coughed and hacked. Muffin jumped on the floor. Jezebel leaped
from the sofa and ran around the couch. Kit took the tube and fastened
the nasal cannula inside her nostrils, then lighted up a Winston. She
inhaled and glanced at the stunned crew and Lundgren. Robin, with his
eyes popping and mouth opened, reminded her of Joan Crawford in
*Whatever Happened to Baby Jane.*

"You can't swear on TV," Lundgren said.

Kit glanced at her, looked away, and flicked ash into the dish. It was
a knee-jerk reaction, a build-up from the last several months. Also,
she wasn't convinced Lundgren was on her side.

"You can't go off the rails like that, Miss Covington. It won't help
you."

"Infamous. Sexualization. Men sexualize women. Who's head of
advertising? They use sex to sell hamburgers, anything. Look at films!
Who runs the networks?"

"It's a lead-in," Lundgren said.

"I've been assaulted and harassed like all those women. I don't blame
anyone but the shits who hurt me." Kit blew smoke at the side of
Lundgren's face. "How dare you judge me."

Lundgren waved away the smoke. "I'm not, Miss Covington. Not at all."
Jezebel arched her back and rubbed against Lundgren's leg.

Kit crushed the cigarette into the plate. She narrowed her gaze at the
blonde, who with her furrowed brow and the gentle way she stroked and
caressed Jezebel, didn't fool Kit. Behind Lundgren's look of
compassion was a frozen dish of ambition.

"Would you like to try it again?" Lundgren said.

Kit caught the rapport---the way Lundgren and Robin shot glances at
each other--- and now her cat had turned traitor.

She took off the oxygen tube. "Muffin." The poodle ran to her and
leaped in her lap. Robin sat at the far end of the couch.

"We're ready," the camerawoman said.

Lundgren looked into the camera.

"We're here with Kit Covington. Known in the 1950s as Queen of the Bs,
she has made a scandalizing comeback---."

"Scandalizing! That's nothing compared to the shit I see on HBO."

Lundgren made the throat-slash sign and stood from the sofa.

"We need to take a break."

"We sure as hell do." Kit attached the oxygen tube and rose from the
couch. Muffin bounded to the floor. Kit wheeled Sherman to the screen
door, shooing Robin away, opened it, and went outside.

"Mom?"

Kit ignored him. She wheeled Sherman down the ramp while lighting a
cigarette.

She and her boy had been snookered into believing Lundgren was on her
side. "Scandalizing," she mumbled. What did Lundgren know about the
life of a girl in the 1940s? Those young punks don't know a damn thing
about what life was like before they were born.

She clamped the ciggie in the corner of her mouth and steered the
wheels over the yellow bricks Robin had laid that led down to her
studio. She'd shut the door, pick up her pallet and brush, and lose
herself as she disappeared into her painting.

The white stucco building, with red bougainvillea blooming against the
side of the wall, inspired the artist in Kit. She painted color in
splashes and dashes, mix-matching paint, blending oil, watercolor, and
charcoal onto the canvases. Entering her studio was the closest thing
to going to church. It was a place where her creativity transported
and elated her.

She mashed the cigarette into the standing ashtray outside. The
galleries complained of having to clean her canvas'. To show her how
the smoke diminished her work, Robin took a moist cloth and gently
wiped a painting. The rag turned yellow. Without the cover of
nicotine, the colors burst with vitality. It was a huge sacrifice not
to smoke while she painted, but for her art, she would do anything.

Kit went into her sanctuary, the studio overlooking her cactus garden.
Rows of tall windows allowed light to stream in. And where there
weren't windows, her imagination decorated the walls. Robin had
constructed built-ins for stacking paintings, nooks for brushes and
paints, a worktable with drawers. Her boy built the studio exactly how
she insisted.

In the late 1980s, Robin went behind her back and entered her work in
contests. Furious by Robin's betrayal, even when she won, she wouldn't
talk to him for days. He adored being the son of a movie star, but
being her art agent satisfied both his nurturing and dramatic nature.
He arranged her exhibits at MoMA, the Whitney, and others, with as
much flare as his once movie star mother. He made deals so her work
hung in The Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Prado.

From the beginning she signed her work D. L. Hawkins, after Robin's
father, leaving off his last name, Sutton. He lived his forty-four
years as an art form, free and spontaneous, he danced when other men
walked. My God how she missed him.

Kit made a fortune from her paintings, donating millions of dollars to
art institutes. Who would take her seriously if they knew the esteemed
D. L. Hawkins was once a second-rate sex-kitten?

Kit shut the door against the world. It hurt having those young women
wrongly judge her. She knew what women went through, especially young
women. Mad at herself for being so sensitive, she hated to admit that
she cared what others thought of her.

"I knocked but you didn't answer."

Kit turned so fast the oxygen cannula pulled at her nostrils.

The blonde talk show host stood in the doorway, holding Muffin.
Lundgren wore the same expression---open mouth, wide eyes---as when
Kit dropped the f-bomb.

"Oh my God. I don't believe it."

"I'm not doing the interview," Kit said.

Lundgren gazed at the art on the walls. "Neither am I, Miss
Covington."

"Then why are you here? And why are you holding my dog?"

"I followed Muffin," Lundgren said, releasing the poodle. "She brought
me here."

"Fink," Kit said, glaring at the dog.

"I wanted to let you know I cancelled." Lundgren continued to stare at
the art and the unfinished oil painting on the easel. "And to say
goodbye." Lundgren shook her head. "I can't believe it," she said,
looking at a pastel that leaned against the wall. *"I'm standing in
D.L. Hawkins's studio."*

Kit hacked, "Th---This is," she stuttered, "*private*."

"I'm sorry. I swear---*swear,* I won't mention a word to anyone. Are
you and Hawkins an item?" she said, glancing at Muffin's bed and water
dish in the corner.

Shaking, startled by the intrusion into her secret life, Kit watched
dumbfounded as Lundgren made a b-line to the easel.

"You, you're not supposed---." Kit stammered.

"A merry-go-round, where the horses are riding the people."

Didn't Lundgren hear her? Just barged her way into D. L.'s studio as
if Kit didn't exist. She shuffled across the wooden floor, shoving
Sherman over to the easel.

Lundgren angled her head. "Animal cruelty. It's amazing to me how
Hawkins takes an idea and turns it on its head. I saw his exhibit at
MoMA when I did my post-graduate work. Blew me away."

"You know his work?"

"I majored in art. Didn't have the talent, so I changed to law."
Lundgren leaned into the unfinished painting. "He tells a story with
brush strokes. What a genius." She looked at Kit. "I know he's a
recluse, but I'd be honored to meet him."

It reminded Kit of when Robin told her how critics and docents praised
her work at exhibits. But to have someone stand in her studio and
express how her art touched them, well, it made her---happy.

"He uses horses a lot," Lundgren said. "My favorite is the *Equine
Series. *You can feel the movement, hear the hooves beating against
the ground."

Kit was impressed by the woman's knowledge, her trained eye.

"Where did you meet? In the carnival, or circus? It must have been a
hard life."

"Not as bad as home. Carnival came to town, and I ran away. Fourteen
years old, a hoochie-coochie girl. It was roughest on the animals and
freaks. In 1948, no jobs for women, but I survived." Kit hadn't talked
about her life with the carny for years. But like Lundgren said, it
showed up in her work, often with horses. "The circus. Then the
pin-ups and movies. I survived that too. Not like the other blonde
bombshells. So many died--- suicides, over doses. Jayne Mansfield was
killed in a car crash." Kit felt fatigued. "Yes," she nodded, "I
survived that life, too."

Lundgren listened, but Kit observed her inching her way toward the
collage series on the worktable.

"This is an incredible studio. The lighting. High ceilings. Skylights.
Everything an artist could dream of. Makes me want to paint again."
Lundgren glanced at Muffin lapping water from her bowl and then settle
into her bed.

Kit flinched when Lundgren spotted her pink paw-patterned smock draped
over the back of a chair and the unopened pack of Winstons on the work
table.

Lundgren turned slowly. She didn't look at her, just stared off. Kit
experienced a shock of her own. She saw Lundgren putting it all
together--- amazement, then the revelation. Oh shit! What could Kit do
about it? Kill her?

Lundgren tidied her short blonde hair behind her ears.

"I need a cigarette." Kit wheeled Sherman toward the door. "C'mon
Lundgren. D. L. wouldn't want anyone but me alone with his work," she
said, making light of a moment that changed both their lives.

Muffin ran out the door. Kit looked over her shoulder. "You coming?"

Their eyes met. Lundgren's were filled with tears.

"I'm tired. I need to sit down. Coming?"

Kit and Muffin walked down the path to the cactus garden. She figured
Lundgren was somewhere behind. Tears. She knew them well. But when
others cried, it put her at a disadvantage, made her feel mushy. And
the young woman looked so beautiful standing in her studio with the
sunlight catching every nuance of understanding that passed over her
face.

Kit sat on a wrought iron bench, pulled Sherman close, lighted up, and
surveyed her garden.

On a lookout, atop the Palisades, her nearest neighbor somewhere
below, she really was a recluse. At eighty-five, with death a kiss
away, she'd been angry for decades, for her stepfather's abuse,
Daniel's death, even the small slights, building on top of one another
making her view of life a vista of loneliness.

Muffin whined. Kit looked up and saw Lundgren. Muffin jumped up on her
hind legs begging Lundgren to pick her up. The woman crouched down,
petted Muffin, and looked at Kit.

She nodded.

"I have two silkies, I bet she smells them."

"It's more than that." Kit's voice had the tired monotony of a flat
tire. It wasn't even noon and she needed a nap. She coughed, hacked,
and spit out a glob of phlegm. "Excuse me." Kit took out her
handkerchief and wiped her mouth. "I'm not used to company," she said
and continued to smoke.

"Hey, Mom," Robin yelled from the top of the garden path, "is
everything okay?"

"Yes," Lundgren answered for her. "Tell the crew I'll be up in a few
minutes."

Lundgren handed Muffin to Kit and walked around the garden. Her hair
was tousled by the breeze.

Kit preferred her like this---mussed. She wondered what the woman
looked like at home, in jeans and a T-shirt. Lundgren walked through
the narrow aisles, inspecting the plants.

"They're beautiful how they bloom," she said. "Like a miracle. I love
the subtlety of the color, the shape, how the sunlight captures the
unexposed side of the petals."

Kit remembered how Lundgren studied the photos on the wall. She was
sensitive, with an artist's eye. Maybe she wasn't going to exploit her
after all. The pretty blonde with the slender build must have put up
with a lot of sexual harassment. If so, Kit doubted she'd share any of
it with her. She thought of Lundgren as quiet, low-key, except when
she talked about D. L. Hawkins, then she herself bloomed.

"I understand why you had to choose a pseudonym," Lundgren said with
her back still to Kit. She turned. "I can't imagine what you went
through." Lundgren walked over and sat next to her. "Not just your
generation. My mother had me young. My father ran off and the only way
she could keep me and get an education was to dance in strip clubs.
She made a good living. That was the 1980s. It's still hard."

The two women gazed at the garden with the Pacific as a backdrop.

"There's a way to make everyone forget about your video," Lundgren
said.

Kit took a deep inhalation of oxygen, closed her eyes, and savored her
last moments as D. L. Hawkins. It was her little champagne-colored
poodle who had pulled back the curtain and revealed her
identity---Muffin, leading Lundgren down the path to her door, giving
her away.

Kit could see it now. Robin would take off her oxygen tube and dance
her around the living room, overjoyed that his mom would be coming out
of the closet. The thought of his endless euphoria exhausted her, but
Lundgren was right. It would wipe that stupid video off the networks
and change her name from a verb back to a noun.

She stubbed out her Winston. Leaning on Lundgren, she struggled to her
feet.

"I'm going to lie down. Run this by Robin. You guys work out the
details. But tell him not to wake me until three. And I'll want my
martini extra dry."

Kit shuffled along. She pulled Sherman as the wheels made clap-clap
sounds over the yellow brick path, with Lundgren beside her and Muffin
running ahead.

**DC Diamondopolous** is an award-winning short story, and flash
fiction writer with hundreds of stories published internationally in
print and online magazines, literary journals, and anthologies. DC\'s
stories have appeared in: *Progenitor, 34th Parallel, So It Goes: The
Literary Journal of the Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library, Lunch
Ticket, *and others. DC's recently released collection *Captured Up
Close (20th Century Short-Short Stories)* has two Pushcart Prize
nominated stories and one nominated for Best of the Net Anthology. Her
first collection of stories was *Stepping Up. *She lives on the
California coast with her wife and animals.
[dcdiamondopolous.com](http://dcdiamondopolous.com/)
