# Sir Gawain and the Dragon

![](dragon.jpg){class="a"}

## Frank Thomas Smith

One of the most famous knights of King Arthur’s Round Table in
Camelot was Sir Gawain, whose name means “white falcon”. His
adventures, as those of his comrades Galahad, Lancelot, Perceval and
Arthur himself, have been the subject of many tales. But Gawain was
not always a knight; he was also a boy once. Now we are going to
tell you one of Sir Gawain’s adventures when he was a boy, before
King Arthur formed his circle of Knights of the Round Table.

 

            Gawain’s father was the king of the Orkney Islands, but
he had lost a war against the barbarian invaders who devastated the
North Sea islands, and found refuge in England. He lived there with
his family and court in one of the smallest castles of the kingdom,
not far from King Arthur’s imposing castle. Gawain often went to
Arthur’s castle to watch the knights joust. When he saw the knights
in all their fine armor blandishing their lances and swords, he
decided to become a knight himself when he grew up. With this idea
in mind he carved a lance and a sword of wood, with which he passed
hours daily practicing mounted on Blanca, the white mare his mother
had given him.

            During his visits to the royal castle he often saw the
princess, a child with long chestnut hair, plump and pretty, who was
called Gunver. He greeted her by taking off his hat and making a
deep, sweeping bow. He would have liked to play with her, but she
was a princess of England, and Princesses didn’t have time to play
children’s games. She always smiled at him though, and he had the
impression that she would have liked to play. Poor princess, he
thought.

            One day when Gawain was about to win a joust against an
imaginary enemy in the courtyard of his father’s castle, one of King
Arthur’s  pages came running in all out of breath and pulling his
hair.

            “Master, master, the princess has been kidnapped, come
to the royal castle immediately by order of the king! Oh -- where is
the master?”

            Gawain’s father came out of the castle and grabbed the
page by the neck. “Calm yourself and tell me what happened,” he
said. “Who kidnapped the princess?”

            “A dragon!” the page cried, quite beside himself. “I saw
it with my own eyes. He seized the poor princess, put her on his
spiny back and fled into the forest. The king has ordered all nobles
and knights to come immediately to the royal castle to participate
in the pursuit.”

            Gawain’s father released the page, whose face was
turning orange, and entered the castle to don his armor. “Prepare my
horse!” he cried to his own page, an old toothless servant. Minutes
later, he galloped away to the royal palace.

            Gawain remained seated on Blanca with his mouth open.
Princess Gunver kidnapped, he thought. I must rescue her. Without
another thought he turned Blanca’s head toward the gate, which
remained open, booted her flanks with imaginary spurs, and was lost
in the cloud of dust which his father’s horse had kicked up.
Everyone was so agitated by the bad news that none noticed him
leave.

            He didn’t head for the royal palace, because he knew
they wouldn’t let him join the pursuit. Instead, he galloped
straight into the forest. He had no armor, but with his trusty
wooden sword and lance he was confident that he would slay the
dragon and rescue the princess -- if she hadn’t already been eaten.

            Once inside the forest, Gawain had no choice but to
advance without a fixed direction, for he had no idea where the
dragon might have taken the princess. Several hours later darkness
fell and the noises the nocturnal animals made frightened him. But
he told himself that a knight should not be afraid of the dark, and
continued on his quest.

            When he could no longer see a yard ahead -- for it was a
moonless night --he came to a stream and decided to pass the night
there. After he and Blanca drank the refreshing water, he gathered
kindling and made a fire to keep warm. He had left in such a rush
that he had forgotten to bring food. Blanca, though, grazed
contentedly.

            Gawain awoke in the morning when the sun stroked his
eyelids. He was ferociously hungry and discovered to his delight
that he had fallen asleep under an apple tree whose branches hung
heavy with fruit and was crowned with mistletoe. He filled his hat
with apples and sat against the tree to enjoy his breakfast.

            “*Does it taste good*?”

            Gawain jumped and looked up and around him. The voice
seemed to have thundered from the sky.

            “Ye..ye..yes,” he said, not knowing to whom.

            “Do you have an extra one?”

            Gawain had already looked in all directions without
seeing anyone. “Where are you?” he asked the air.

             “Here,” the voice replied and the figure of a old man
with a long white beard appeared before him. He carried a staff from
which small red roses grew. The boy was struck dumb with surprise.

            “Do you have an apple for me?” the man asked. “I haven’t
eaten in three days.”

            Gawain looked into his hat. “There is only one left,” he
said, “but the tree is full.”

            “Really?” the man said, looking at the tree’s branches.

            Gawain looked up at the branches and saw that the tree
was now bare of fruit -- only the mistletoe remained. 

            “Then take this last apple.” And taking the apple from
his hat he offered it to the man, who ate it with evident relish.
When he had consumed the core, he wiped his mouth with the sleeve of
his tunic and said, “What are you doing alone in the forest?”

            “I’m looking for someone,” Gawain answered.

            “A-ha! And who are you looking for, if I may ask?”

            “For the dragon who kidnapped the princess. Have you
seen them?”

            The man’s green eyes opened wide. “The dragon who
kidnapped the princess, eh. Tell me, what is your name?

            “Gawain.”

            His eyes opened wider still. “I see.”

            “What do you see?” Gawain asked him.

            “Nothing, it’s only a manner of speaking. Now allow me
to introduce myself. I am Merlin.”

            Now it was the boy’s eyes which opened wide. “The
magician?”

            “Himself,” Merlin smiled.

            “Can you help me, Merlin?”

            Merlin sighed and the smile disappeared from his lips.
“That depends, boy, it depends a lot,” he said.

            “On what?”

            “On what kind of help you want.”

            “I want to know where the princess and the dragon are.”

            “Nothing else?”

            “No,” Gawain answered, “nothing else.”

            “You don’t want me to rescue the princess too, by any
chance?”

            “Of course not,” Gawain answered firmly. “*I* will do
that.”

            The smile returned to Merlin’s face. “And do you think
you can do it alone?”

            “Of course,” the boy said, somewhat offended. “Why not?”

            “Why not?” Merlin scratched his beard. “Yes, why not
indeed?”

            “Do you know where they are?” Gawain asked again.

            “Yes and no,” the magician answered.

            “What do you mean?” Gawain said, annoyed. “Either you
know or you don’t.”

            “Things aren’t always that simple, son. It could be that
I know a part but not all. Understand?”

            “No.”

            “Well,” Merlin began patiently, “suppose I knew where
they where going but didn’t know if they arrived. Do you understand
now?

            “Where were they going?” Gawain asked *im*patiently.

            “The magician’s eyes changed from green to black. “I
suppose you know that the dragon is a ferocious, cruel animal.”

            “Sure,” Gawain said, feeling secure way up on Blanca’s
back.

            Merlin grew until his eyes were level with Gawain’s.
“And you know that he has only one weakness.”

            “S..sure.”

            “Good. Then all I have to do is tell you where they were
going, right?”

            “Right,” Gawain said, wondering what the dragon’s only
weakness could be.

            “That way,” Merlin said, pointing to the west with an
enormously elongated finger.

            Gawain looked in that direction and jerked the reins to
make his horse turn, but stopped suddenly and, turning back to
Merlin, asked: “What is the dragon’s only weakness, Mr. Merlin. I
forgot.

            “You forgot, eh?” Merlin chuckled. “The dragon’s only
weakness is that he is a fool -- and it seems that you suffer from
the same weakness.”

            Gawain blushed, hung his head, then looked Merlin in the
eye and said, “Thank you”. He galloped off westward in pursuit of
the dragon and the princess.

           

It was almost noon when Gawain, approaching a clearing in the
forest, heard the princess’s voice. He reined Blanca in abruptly,
dismounted and went on foot to the clearing. What he saw when he
reached it made him catch his breath.

            At the other end of the round clearing the princess sat
on the ground singing. A brown and red dragon listened attentively.
What could it mean? Gawain asked himself. Suddenly the dragon lifted
its snout  and sniffed the air. “I smell the blood of an
Englishman,” he snarled.

            Realizing that he was about to be discovered, Gawain
drew his sword and leaped into the middle of the clearing shouting:
“I am the Englishmen you smell, evil dragon. Gawain, the white
falcon!”

            The dragon blinked as though he couldn’t believe what he
was seeing.

            “Gawain!” Princess Gunver cried, jumping to her feet,
“what are you doing here?”

            “I came to rescue you,” the boy said, surprised that she
didn’t know.

            “Rescue me from what?”

            “From what? From the dragon, of course.”

            “Oh, thank you,” Gunver smiled. “But that won’t be
necessary. The dragon will take me home once I’ve finished singing.”

            Bewildered, Gawain looked at the dragon, who had not
moved.

            “Is it a good dragon then?” he asked Gunver.

            “I think so.”

            “Tell me,” Gawain shouted at the beast, “are you a good
dragon?”

            On hearing this the dragon thumped his tail on the
ground, making it shake. “A good dragon?” he thundered, offended.
“Everyone knows that all dragons are bad.”

            “But...but you haven’t eaten the princess and I
thought...”

            “Not yet!” the dragon interrupted.

            “Are you going to eat me?” Gunver exclaimed, horrified.

            “Naturally, and soon, when I’m hungrier. I haven’t done
it yet because I like music and we dragons can’t sing.” He shook his
enormous head and scratched his scales with a razor-sharp claw. “So
please don’t call me *good*!”

            Gawain raised his sword, pushed Princess Gunver behind
him and said: “I see that I have not come in vain. I will slay you,
cruel dragon!”

            “With that?” the dragon asked, meaning the wooden sword.
“Watch that tree.” He pointed with his claw at a tall oak adorned
with spheres of mistletoe. Then he blew fire from his nose and the
tree was reduced to a pile of ashes. Gawain stepped back and looked
at his poor sword while the dragon scoffed: “What do you say now,
dragon-killer?”

            Gawain realized that he had no chance of defeating the
dragon with his sword and lance, and if he tried he would be reduced
to a pile of ashes. “What should I do?” he pondered. Then he
remembered Merlin’s words: *The dragon has only one weakness--he’s a
fool*.

            “You’re right,” he said to the dragon, containing his
fear. “I can’t kill you alone, so I’ll wait for the other knights to
arrive. They should be here soon.”      

            “Other knights?” the dragon snarled. “What other
knights?”

            “The knights who are coming to rescue the princess, of
course.”

            “Ha! I have already defeated ten knights at once,” the
dragon said proudly. “Do you know what was left of them?”

            “Ashes?”

            “Unfortunately, yes, which meant that I couldn’t eat
them.”

            “You are a very powerful dragon. The thousand knights
who are on their way will not cause you any problem,” Gawain said,
although he knew that in such a short time King Arthur couldn’t have
gathered more than a dozen.

            “What? Did you say a thousand?” The dragon scratched his
scales, which meant he was thinking. “They don’t know where I am.”

            “If I knew why shouldn’t they?”

            “That’s true,” the dragon said, worried now. “How did
you know?”

            “A magician told me.”

            “A magician?”

            “Yes, Merlin, who is telling the others right now.”

            “ Who cares?” the dragon growled. “After I’ve eaten you
and this plump princess I will have the strength to defeat ten
thousand knights.”

            “I don’t agree, dragon, because the knights are led by
my father, the king of the Orkney Islands, and Arthur, who is the
king of England and Princess Gunver’s father. They have a lot of
experience fighting dragons.”

            “Have they really fought against dragons?”

            “Of course. How do you think they got to be kings.”

             The dragon scratched his scales and rumbled. “Well, I’m
going to eat you two just in case. Besides, I’m hungry.”

            “If you do we’ll all die,” Gawain said. “I have a better
idea.”

            “You do? What is it?”

            “Come over here.” The boy led the dragon to the edge of
the clearing, where Gunver couldn’t hear them.

            “We’ll pretend that I killed you,” Gawain whispered, and
the dragon had to bend his long neck down to hear. “When the knights
come they’ll take the princess away without paying any attention to
you because they’ll think you’re dead. Then you can escape.”

            “But how---?”

            Suddenly they heard voices and cries coming from the
forest.

            “They’re coming,” Gawain said urgently. “We must hurry.
But if I help you, you must promise never to return to this part of
the country.”

            “But what are we going to do?”

            “Do you promise that after escaping you will never
return?” Gawain insisted.

            “Yes, yes, I promise. Now tell me what we’re going to
do.”

            “I go to one end of the clearing and you go to the
opposite end. Then I attack you with my lance. It won’t even scratch
you of course, but at my signal you fall down as though dead and I
put my foot on your back. The princess will witness it all and will
tell the knights that you are dead. Get it?”

            “Yes,” the dragon replied, scratching furiously, “I
think so.”

            “Once on the ground,” Gawain continued, “you mustn’t
open your eyes under any circumstance, or they’ll realize that
you’re not dead and the thousand knights will stick you with their
lances until you’re dead for real. Do you understand?”

            The sound of riders came nearer, almost upon them.

            “Yes, let’s start,” the dragon urged. He was shaking
from snout to tail at the thought of the thousand knights piercing
his leathery body with their steel lances.

            Gawain walked quickly over to the princess. “Give me
your kerchief, Gunver,” he said. “Knights always carry their lady’s
kerchief when they go into battle.”

            “But Gawain,” Gunver protested, “he’ll incinerate you.”

            “Not if I kill him first,” Gawain smiled, taking the
pink silk kerchief that the princess offered him and tying it around
his arm.

            He mounted Blanca, drew his wooden lance and charged the
dragon who opened his enormous jaws and roared ferociously. Gawain
knew that his lance would break like a dry twig against the dragon’s
scales, so at the last moment he leaned towards the right and passed
without touching his opponent.

            “Fall down!” he whispered as he passed, and the dragon
-- an excellent actor -- gave a desperate cry as though he were
mortally wounded, and collapsed, causing the earth to tremble.

            Gawain dismounted, climbed up onto the dragon’s back
and, raising his sword, cried: “You are saved, princess!”

            At that moment four knights charged into the clearing
from the forest. They were Gawain’s father, King Arthur and the only
other two knights Arthur had been able to recruit at such short
notice.

            “Gawain!” his father shouted on seeing his son standing
on the dragon. “What happened? Is the dragon dead?”

            “The princess has been rescued,” Gawain answered
solemnly, thereby avoiding a lie.

            The dragon, after playing dead until he was sure that
all of the thousand knights who had come to kill him were gone, fled
from England and never returned.

 
Seven years later, when King Arthur was forming his round table of
knights, one of the first to be selected was Sir Gawain, whose fame
as a dragon-killer and rescuer of damsels had already been well
established.

