
# The United States Refuses to Play by the World's Rules

![](inside-guantanamo.jpg){class="a"}

### Here Are Three Ways

By [Rebecca Gordon](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/rebeccagordon/)

In 1963, the summer I turned 11, my mother had a gig evaluating Peace
Corps programs in Egypt and Ethiopia. My younger brother and I spent
most of that summer in France. We were first in Paris with my mother
before she left for North Africa, then with my father and his girlfriend
in a tiny town on the Mediterranean. (In the middle of our six-week
sojourn there, the girlfriend ran off to marry a Czech she'd met, but
that's another story.)

In Paris, I saw American tourists striding around in their shorts and
sandals, cameras slung around their necks, staking out positions in
cathedrals and museums. I listened to my mother's commentary on what she
considered their boorishness and insensitivity. In my 11-year-old mind,
I tended to agree. I'd already heard the expression "the ugly American"
--- although I then knew nothing about the prophetic [1958
novel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ugly_American) with that title
about U.S. diplomatic bumbling in southeast Asia in the midst of the
Cold War --- and it seemed to me that those interlopers in France fit
the term perfectly.

[]{#anchor}When I got home, I confided to a friend (whose parents, I
learned years later, worked for the CIA) that sometimes, while in
Europe, I'd felt ashamed to be an American. "You should never feel that
way," she replied. "This is the best country in the world!"

Indeed, the United States was, then, the leader of what was known as
"the free world." Never mind that, throughout the Cold War, we would
actively support dictatorships (in Argentina, Chile, Indonesia,
Nicaragua, and El Salvador, among other places) and actually overthrow
democratizing governments (in Chile, Guatemala, and Iran, for example).
In that era of the G.I. Bill, strong unions, employer-provided
healthcare, and general postwar economic dominance, to most of us who
were white and within reach of the middle class, the United States
probably did look like the best country in the world.

Things do look a bit different today, don't they? In this century, in
many important ways, the United States has become an outlier and, in
some cases, even an outlaw. Here are three examples of U.S. behavior
that has been literally
[egregious](https://www.google.com/search?client=firefox-b-1-d&q=define%3A+egregious),
three ways in which this country has stood out from the crowd in a sadly
malevolent fashion.

#### Guantánamo, the Forever Prison Camp

In January 2002, the administration of President George W. Bush
established an offshore prison camp at the U.S**.** Naval Base in
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. The idea was to house prisoners taken in what had
already been labelled "the Global War on Terror" on a little piece of
"U.S." soil beyond the reach of the American legal system and whatever
protections that system might afford anyone inside the country. (If you
wonder how the United States had access to a chunk of land on an island
nation with which it had the frostiest of relations, including decades
of economic sanctions, here's the story: in 1903, long before Cuba's
1959 revolution, its government had granted the United States "coaling"
rights at Guantánamo, meaning that the U.S. Navy could establish a base
there to refuel its ships. The agreement remained in force in 2002, as
it does today.)

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1510703330/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

In the years that followed, Guantánamo became the site of the
[torture](https://www.theguardian.com/law/2023/may/11/abu-zubaydah-drawings-guantanamo-bay-us-torture-policy)
and even
[murder](https://harpers.org/archive/2010/03/the-guantanamo-suicides/)
of individuals the U.S. took prisoner in Afghanistan, Iraq, and other
countries ranging from [Pakistan
](https://www.therenditionproject.org.uk/prisoners/zubaydah.html)to
[Mauritania](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mohamedou_Ould_Slahi). Having
written for more than 20 years about such U.S. torture programs that
[began](https://www.newsweek.com/time-think-about-torture-149445) in
[October
2001](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/21/lawsuit-muslims-september-11-roundup-abuse),
I find today that I can't bring myself to chronicle one more time all
the horrors that went on at Guantánamo or at CIA "black sites" in
countries ranging from Thailand to Poland, or at Bagram Air Base in
Afghanistan, or indeed at the Abu Ghraib prison and Camp NAMA (whose
motto was: "No blood, no foul") in Iraq. If you don't remember, just go
ahead and google those places. I'll wait.

Thirty men remain at Guantánamo today. Some have never been tried. Some
have never even been charged with a crime. Their continued detention and
torture, including, as recently as 2014, punitive, brutal [forced
feeding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guantanamo_force_feeding) for
hunger strikers, confirmed the status of the United States as a global
scofflaw. To this day, keeping Guantánamo open displays this country's
contempt for international law, including the Geneva Conventions and the
United Nations Convention against Torture. It also displays contempt for
our own legal system, including the Constitution's
"[supremacy](https://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/articlevi)" clause
which makes any ratified international treaty like the Convention
against Torture "the supreme law of the land."

In February 2023, Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, the U.N.'s Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism, became the first representative of the
United Nations ever permitted to visit Guantánamo. She was horrified by
what she found there,
[telling](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/jul/07/guantanamo-bay-un-visit-torture-treatment?CMP=GTUS_email&utm_source=pocket_saves)
the *Guardian* that the U.S. has

> "a responsibility to redress the harms it inflicted on its Muslim
> torture victims. Existing medical treatment, both at the prison camp
> in Cuba and for detainees released to other countries, was inadequate
> to deal with multiple problems such as traumatic brain injuries,
> permanent disabilities, sleep disorders, flashbacks, and untreated
> post-traumatic stress disorder."

"These men," she added, "are all survivors of torture, a unique crime
under international law, and in urgent need of care. Torture breaks a
person, it is intended to render them helpless and powerless so that
they cease to function psychologically, and in my conversations both
with current and former detainees I observed the harms it caused."

The lawyer for one tortured prisoner, [Ammar
al-Baluchi](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/may/16/ammar-al-baluchi-guantanamo-bay-torture),
reports that al-Baluchi "suffers from traumatic brain injury from having
been subjected to 'walling' where his head was smashed repeatedly
against the wall." He has entered a deepening cognitive decline, whose
"symptoms include headaches, dizziness, difficulty thinking and
performing simple tasks." He cannot sleep for more than two hours at a
time, "having been sleep-deprived as a torture technique."

The United States, Ní Aoláin insists, must provide rehabilitative care
for the men it has broken. I have my doubts, however, about the curative
powers of any treatment administered by Americans, even civilian
psychologists. After all, two of them personally [designed and
implemented](https://www.salon.com/2018/09/18/holding-the-line-on-torture_partner/)
the CIA's torture program.

The United States should indeed foot the bill for treating not only the
30 men who remain in Guantánamo, but others who have been released and
continue to suffer the long-term effects of torture. And of course, it
goes without saying that the Biden administration should finally [close
that illegal prison camp](https://www.closeguantanamo.org/) --- although
that's not likely to happen. Apparently it's easier to [end an entire
war](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/08/31/remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-end-of-the-war-in-afghanistan/)
than decide what to do with 30 prisoners.

#### Unlawful Weapons

The United States is an outlier in another arena as well: the production
and deployment of arms widely recognized as presenting an immediate or
future danger to non-combatants. The U.S. has steadfastly resisted
joining conventions outlawing such weaponry, including cluster bombs (or
more euphemistically, "cluster munitions") and landmines.

In fact, the United States deployed cluster bombs in its wars in Iraq,
and Afghanistan. (In the previous century, it dropped [270
million](https://www.npr.org/2023/07/10/1186824634/the-impact-of-cluster-bombs)
of them in Laos alone while fighting the Vietnam War.) Ironically ---
one might even say, hypocritically --- the U.S.
[joined](http://www.stopclustermunitions.org/en-gb/cluster-bombs/use-of-cluster-bombs/in-syria.aspx)
146 other countries in condemning Syrian and Russian use of the same
weapons in the Syrian civil war. Indeed, former White House press
secretary Jen Psaki [told
reporters](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-66134663) that if
Russia were using them in Ukraine (as, in fact, [it
is](https://www.hrw.org/news/2023/05/29/cluster-munition-use-russia-ukraine-war)),
that would constitute a "war crime."

Now the U.S. has sent cluster bombs to Ukraine, supposedly to fill a
crucial gap in the supply of artillery shells. Mind you, it's not that
the United States doesn't have enough conventional artillery shells to
resupply Ukraine. The problem is that sending them there would leave
this country unprepared to fight [two simultaneous (and hypothetical)
major
wars](https://talkingpointsmemo.com/edblog/can-the-world-make-enough-artillery-shells-to-keep-the-ukraine-war-going)
as envisioned in what the Pentagon likes to think of as its readiness
doctrine.

What are cluster munitions? They are artillery shells packed with many
individual bomblets, or "submunitions." When one is fired, from up to 20
miles away, it spreads as many as 90 separate bomblets over a wide area,
making it an excellent way to kill a lot of enemy soldiers with a single
shot.

What places these weapons off-limits for most nations is that not all
the bomblets explode. Some can stay where they fell for years, even
decades, until as a *New York Times* editorial [put
it](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/10/opinion/cluster-munitions-ukraine-biden.html?searchResultPosition=1),
"somebody --- often, a child spotting a brightly colored, battery-size
doodad on the ground --- accidentally sets it off." They can, in other
words, lie in wait long after a war is over, sowing farmland and forest
with deadly booby traps. That's why then-Secretary General of the United
Nations Ban Ki-moon once spoke of "the world's collective revulsion at
these abhorrent weapons." That's why 123 countries have signed the 2008
[Convention on Cluster Munitions](https://www.clusterconvention.org/).
Among the holdouts, however, are Russia, Ukraine, and the United States.

[According](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-66134663) to
National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan, the cluster bombs the U.S. has
now sent to Ukraine each contains 88 bomblets, with, according to the
Pentagon, a failure rate of under 2.5%. (Other sources, however, suggest
that it could be [14% or
higher](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/07/us/cluster-weapons-duds-ukraine.html).)
This means that for every cluster shell fired, at least two submunitions
are likely to be duds. We have no idea how many of these weapons the
U.S. is supplying, but a Pentagon spokesman in a
[briefing](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-66134663) said there
are "hundreds of thousands available." It doesn't take much mathematical
imagination to realize that they present a real future danger to
Ukrainian civilians. Nor is it terribly comforting when Sullivan
[assures the
world](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/10/opinion/cluster-munitions-ukraine-biden.html?searchResultPosition=1)
that the Ukrainian government is "motivated" to minimize risk to
civilians as the munitions are deployed, because "these are their
citizens that they're protecting."

I for one am not eager to leave such cost-benefit risk calculations in
the hands of any government fighting for its survival. That's precisely
why international laws against indiscriminate weapons exist --- to
prevent governments from having to make such calculations in the heat of
battle.

Cluster bombs are only a subset of the weapons that leave behind
"explosive remnants of war." Landmines are another. Like Russia, the
United States is not found among the 164 countries that have signed the
[1999 Ottawa
Convention](https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/ottawasigs), which
required signatories to stop producing landmines, destroy their existing
stockpiles, and clear their own territories of mines.

Ironically, the U.S. routinely donates money to pay for mine clearance
around the world, which is certainly a good thing, given the legacy it
left, for example, in Vietnam.
[According](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/06/opinion/sunday/ban-land-mines.html?action=click&module=RelatedLinks&pgtype=Article)
to the *New York Times* in 2018:

> "Since the war there ended in 1975, at least 40,000 Vietnamese are
> believed to have been killed and another 60,000 wounded by American
> land mines, artillery shells, cluster bombs and other ordnance that
> failed to detonate back then. They later exploded when handled by
> scrap-metal scavengers and unsuspecting children."

#### Hot Enough for Ya?

As I write this piece, [about one-third
](https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2023/07/12/heat-wave-forecast-arizona-texas-southwest/)of
this country's population is living under heat alerts. That's 110
million people. A heatwave [is baking
Europe](https://www.cnn.com/travel/article/italy-health-warning-europe-heatwave-saturday-intl/index.html),
where 16 Italian cities are under warnings, and Greece has closed the
Acropolis to prevent tourists from dying of heat stroke. This summer
looks to be worse in Europe than even last year's record-breaker when
heat killed [more than
60,000](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/10/climate/heat-waves-europe-deaths.html)
people. In the U.S., too, heat is by far the greatest weather-related
killer. Makes you wonder why Texas Governor Greg Abbott [signed a
bill](https://www.businessinsider.com/texas-heat-wave-workers-greg-abbott-mandated-water-breaks-law-2023-7)
eliminating required water breaks for outside workers, just as the
latest heat wave was due to roll in.

Meanwhile, New York's Hudson Valley and [parts of
Vermont](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2023/07/13/vermont-flooding-rainfall-warming-climate/),
including its capital Montpelier, were inundated this past week by a
once-in-a-hundred-year storm, while in South Korea, workers raced to
rescue people whose cars were trapped inside [the completely
submerged](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-66209578) Cheongju tunnel
after a torrential monsoon rainfall. Korea, along with much of Asia,
expects such rains during the summer, but this year's --- like so many
other weather statistics --- have been literally off the charts.
Journalists have finally experienced a sea change (not unlike the
[extraordinary
change](https://climate.copernicus.eu/record-breaking-north-atlantic-ocean-temperatures-contribute-extreme-marine-heatwaves)
in surface water temperatures in the Atlantic Ocean). Gone are the tepid
suggestions that climate change "may play a part" in causing extreme
weather events. Reporters around the world now simply assume that's our
reality.

When it comes to confronting the climate emergency, though, the United
States has once again been bringing up the rear. As far back as 1992, at
the United Nations Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, President George H.W.
Bush resisted setting any caps on carbon-dioxide emissions. As the *New
York Times*
[reported](https://www.nytimes.com/1992/06/11/world/earth-summitbush-rio-president-has-uncomfortable-new-role-taking-hard-line-earth.html)
then, "Showing a personal interest on the subject, he singlehandedly
forced negotiators to excise from the global warming treaty any
reference to deadlines for capping emissions of pollutants." And even
then, Washington was resisting the efforts of poorer countries to wring
some money from us to help defray the costs of their own environmental
efforts.

Some things don't change all that much. Although President Biden
reversed Donald Trump's move to pull the U.S. out of the Paris climate
accords, his own climate record has been a combination of two steps
forward (the green energy transition funding
[found](https://www.epa.gov/green-power-markets/summary-inflation-reduction-act-provisions-related-renewable-energy)
in the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act, for example) and a big step back
([greenlighting](https://www.cnn.com/2023/03/14/politics/willow-project-oil-alaska-explained-climate/index.html)
the ConocoPhillips Willow oil drilling project on federal land in
Alaska's north slope, not to speak of Senator Joe Manchin's [pride and
joy](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/30/climate/mountain-valley-pipe.html),
the \$6.6 billion Mountain Valley Pipeline for natural gas).

And when it comes to remediating the damage our emissions have done to
poorer countries around the world, this country is still a day late and
billions of dollars short. In fact, on July 13th, climate envoy John
Kerry
[told](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/us-under-no-circumstances-will-pay-into-loss-damage-fund-kerry-2023-07-13/)
a congressional hearing that "under no circumstances" would the United
States pay reparations to developing countries suffering the devastating
effects of climate change. Although at the U.N.'s COP 27 conference in
November 2022, the U.S. did (at least in principle) support the creation
of a fund to help poorer countries ameliorate the effects of climate
change, as Reuters
[reported](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/us-under-no-circumstances-will-pay-into-loss-damage-fund-kerry-2023-07-13/),
"the deal did not spell out who would pay into the fund or how money
would be disbursed."

#### Welcome to Solastalgia

I learned a new word recently,
[solastalgia](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18027145/). It actually
*is* a new word, created in 2005 by Australian philosopher Glenn
Albrecht to describe "the distress that is produced by environmental
change impacting on people while they are directly connected to their
home environment." Albrecht's focus was on Australian rural indigenous
communities with centuries of attachment to their particular places, but
I think the concept can be extended, at least metaphorically, to the
rest of us whose lives are now being affected by the painful presences
(and absences) brought on by environmental and climate change: the
presence of unprecedented heat, fire, [noise, and
light](https://new.nsf.gov/news/noise-light-pollution-affect-breeding-habits-birds);
the presence of deadly rain and flooding; and the [growing
absence](https://abcnews.go.com/International/images-antarcticas-doomsday-glacier-show-melting-below/story?id=97269226)
of ice at the earth's poles or on its
[mountains](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furtwängler_Glacier). In my
own life, among other things, it's the loss of
[fireflies](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/animals/article/fireflies-tips-to-protect-from-threats)
and the almost infinite sadness of rarely seeing more than a few faint
[stars](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2023/may/27/light-pollution-threatens-to-make-stars-invisible-within-20-years).

Of course, the "best country in the world" wasn't the only nation
involved in creating the horrors I've been describing. And the ordinary
people who live in this country are not to blame for them. Still, as
beneficiaries of this nation's bounty --- its beauty, its aspirations,
its profoundly injured but still breathing democracy --- we are, as the
philosopher Iris Marion Young
[insisted](https://www.amazon.com/Responsibility-Justice-Oxford-Political-Philosophy/dp/0195392388),
*responsible* for them. It will take organized, collective political
action, but there is still time to bring our outlaw country back into
what indeed should be a united community of nations confronting the
looming horrors on this planet. Or so I hope and believe.

Copyright 2023 Rebecca Gordon

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Rebecca Gordon](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/rebeccagordon/)

Rebecca Gordon, a
[*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/living-for-politics/)[
regular](https://tomdispatch.com/living-for-politics/), teaches at the
University of San Francisco. She is the author of [*Mainstreaming
Torture*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0199336431/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
[*American Nuremberg: The U.S. Officials Who Should Stand Trial for
Post-9/11 War
Crimes*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1510703330/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
and is now at work on a new book on the history of torture in the United
States.
