
# The Profiteers of Armageddon

![](openheimer-sensation.png){class="a"}

### Oppenheimer and the Birth of the Nuclear-Industrial Complex

## By [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

Unless you've been hiding under a rock for the past few months, you're
undoubtedly aware that award-winning director Christopher Nolan has
released a [new
film](https://gregmitchell.substack.com/p/notes-on-seeing-oppenheimer)
about Robert Oppenheimer, known as the "father of the atomic bomb" for
leading the group of scientists who created that deadly weapon as part
of America's World War II-era Manhattan Project. The film has earned
widespread attention, with large numbers of people participating in
what's already become known as
"[Barbieheimer](https://www.business-standard.com/world-news/what-is-barbieheimer-the-viral-trend-that-is-taking-the-internet-by-storm-123071700298_1.html)"
by seeing Greta Gerwig's hit film **Barbie** and Nolan's three-hour-long
**Oppenheimer** on the same day.

Nolan's film is a distinctive pop cultural phenomenon because it deals
with the American use of nuclear weapons, a genuine rarity since ABC's
1983 airing of [**The Day
After**](https://www.nytimes.com/1983/11/20/arts/tv-view-the-day-after-tv-as-a-rallying-cry.html)
about the consequences of nuclear war. (An earlier exception was Stanley
Kubrick's [**Dr.
Strangelove**](https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/almost-everything-in-dr-strangelove-was-true),
his satirical portrayal of the insanity of the Cold War nuclear arms
race.)

[]{#anchor}The film is based on [**American
Prometheus**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0375726268/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
the [Pulitzer
Prize-winning](https://www.pulitzer.org/winners/kai-bird-and-martin-j-sherwin)
2005 biography of Oppenheimer by Kai Bird and Martin Sherwin. Nolan made
it in part to break through the shield of antiseptic rhetoric, bloodless
philosophizing, and public complacency that has allowed such
world-ending weaponry to persist so long after
[Trinity](https://thebulletin.org/virtual-tour/trinity-the-first-nuclear-bomb-test/),
the first nuclear bomb test, was conducted in the New Mexico desert 78
years ago this month.

Nolan's impetus was
[rooted](https://thebulletin.org/premium/2023-07/an-extended-interview-with-christopher-nolan-director-of-oppenheimer/#post-heading)
in his early exposure to the nuclear disarmament movement in Europe. As
he said recently:

> "It's something that's been on my radar for a number of years. I was a
> teenager in the '80s, the early '80s in England. It was the peak of
> CND, Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, the Greenham Common
> \[protest\]; the threat of nuclear war was when I was 12, 13, 14 ---
> it was the biggest fear we all had. I think I first encountered
> Oppenheimer in... Sting's song about the Russians that came out then
> and talks about Oppenheimer's 'deadly toys.'"

A feature film on the genesis of nuclear weapons may not strike you as
an obvious candidate for box-office blockbuster status. As Nolan's
teenage son
[said](https://thebulletin.org/premium/2023-07/an-extended-interview-with-christopher-nolan-director-of-oppenheimer/#post-heading)
when his father told him he was thinking about making such a film,
"Well, nobody really worries about nuclear weapons anymore. Are people
going to be interested in that?" Nolan responded that, given what's at
stake, he
[worries](https://thebulletin.org/premium/2023-07/an-extended-interview-with-christopher-nolan-director-of-oppenheimer/#post-heading)
about complacency and even denial when it comes to the global risks
posed by the nuclear arsenals on this planet. "You're normalizing
killing tens of thousands of people. You're creating moral equivalences,
false equivalences with other types of conflict... \[and so\] accepting,
normalizing... the danger."

These days, unfortunately, you're talking about anything but just tens
of thousands of people dying in a nuclear face-off. A 2022
[report](https://www.ippnw.org/programs/nuclear-weapons-abolition/nuclear-famine-climate-effects-of-regional-nuclear-war)
by Ira Helfand and International Physicians for the Prevention of
Nuclear War estimated that a "limited" nuclear war between India and
Pakistan that used roughly 3% of the world's [12,000-plus
](https://fas.org/initiative/status-world-nuclear-forces/)nuclear
warheads would kill "hundreds of millions, perhaps even billions" of us.
A full-scale nuclear war between the United States and Russia, the study
suggests, could kill up to five (yes, five!) billion people within two
years, essentially ending life as we know it on this planet in a
"[nuclear winter](https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016-022-00573-0)."

Obviously, all too many of us don't grasp the stakes involved in a
nuclear conflict, thanks in part to "[psychic
numbing](https://publicseminar.org/essays/warning-from-ukraine/)," a
concept regularly invoked by Robert Jay Lifton, author of [**Hiroshima
in America: A History of
Denial**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0380727641/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
(co-authored with Greg Mitchell), among many other books. Lifton
[describes](https://publicseminar.org/essays/warning-from-ukraine/)
psychic numbing as "a diminished capacity or inclination to feel"
prompted by "the completely unprecedented dimension of this revolution
in technological destructiveness."

Given the Nolan film's focus on Oppenheimer's story, some crucial issues
related to the world's nuclear dilemma are either dealt with only
briefly or omitted altogether.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1568586973/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

The [staggering devastation
](https://thebulletin.org/2020/08/counting-the-dead-at-hiroshima-and-nagasaki/)caused
by the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki is suggested only indirectly
without any striking visual evidence of the devastating human
consequences of the use of those two weapons. Also largely ignored are
the critical voices who then argued that there was no need to drop a
bomb, no less two of them, on a Japan most of whose cities had already
been devastated by U.S. fire-bombing to end the war. General (and later
President) Dwight D. Eisenhower
[wrote](https://substack.com/inbox/post/135322826) that when he was told
by Secretary of War Henry Stimson of the plan to drop atomic bombs on
populated areas in Japan, "I voiced to him my grave misgivings, first on
the basis of my belief that Japan was already defeated and that dropping
the bomb was completely unnecessary."

The film also fails to address the health
[impacts](https://www.wpsr.org/why-we-work-on-nuclear-weapons) of the
research, testing, and production of such weaponry, which to this day is
[still
causing](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/20/science/trinity-nuclear-test-atomic-bomb-oppenheimer.html)
disease and death, even without another nuclear weapon ever being used
in war. Victims of nuclear weapons development include people who were
impacted by the fallout from U.S. nuclear testing in the Western United
States and the[ Marshall
Islands](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2022-11/news/us-marshall-islands-grapple-nuclear-legacy)
in the Western Pacific, [uranium
miners](https://digital.lib.washington.edu/researchworks/handle/1773/25190?show=full)
on Navajo lands, and many others. Speaking of the first nuclear test in
Los Alamos, New Mexico, Tina Cordova of the [Tularosa Basin Downwinders
Consortium](https://www.trinitydownwinders.com/), which represents that
state's residents who suffered widespread cancers and high rates of
infant mortality caused by radiation from that explosion,
[said](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2023/07/21/what-oppenheimer-leaves-out/)
"It's an inconvenient truth... People just don't want to reflect on the
fact that American citizens were bombed at Trinity."

Another crucially important issue has received almost no attention.
Neither the film nor the discussion sparked by it has explored one of
the most important reasons for the continued existence of nuclear
weapons --- the profits it yields the participants in America's massive
nuclear-industrial complex.

Once Oppenheimer and other concerned scientists and policymakers
[failed](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2005_07-08/Kuznick) to convince
the Truman administration to simply close Los Alamos and place nuclear
weapons and the materials needed to develop them under international
control --- the only way, as they saw it, to head off a nuclear arms
race with the Soviet Union --- the drive to expand the nuclear weapons
complex was on. Research and production of nuclear warheads and
nuclear-armed bombers, missiles, and submarines quickly became a big
business, whose beneficiaries have worked doggedly to limit any efforts
at the reduction or elimination of nuclear arms.

****The Manhattan Project and the Birth of the Nuclear-Industrial
Complex****

The [Manhattan
Project](https://www.britannica.com/event/Manhattan-Project) Oppenheimer
directed was one of the largest public works efforts ever undertaken in
American history. Though the **Oppenheimer **film focuses on Los Alamos,
it quickly came to include far-flung facilities across the United
States. At its peak, the project would employ [130,000
workers](https://www.energy.gov/lm/manhattan-project-background-information-and-preservation-work)
--- as many as in the entire U.S. auto industry at the time.

According to nuclear expert Stephen Schwartz, author of[
](https://www.brookings.edu/books/atomic-audit/)[**Atomic
Audit**](https://www.brookings.edu/books/atomic-audit/), the seminal
work on the financing of U.S. nuclear weapons programs, through the end
of 1945 the Manhattan Project cost [nearly \$38
billion](https://twitter.com/AtomicAnalyst/status/1683546295279951897?s=20)
in today's dollars, while helping spawn an enterprise that has since
cost taxpayers an almost unimaginable [*\$12
trillion*](https://twitter.com/AtomicAnalyst/status/1674806938683551745?s=20)**
**for nuclear weapons and related programs. And the costs never end. The
Nobel prize-winning International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons
(ICAN) reports that the U.S. spent [\$43.7
billion](https://www.icanw.org/wasted_2022_global_nuclear_weapons_spending)
on nuclear weapons last year alone, and a new Congressional Budget
Office report suggests that another [\$756
billion](https://www.cbo.gov/publication/59054#:~:text=CBO%20estimates%20that%20plans%20for,for%20the%202021–2030%20period.)
will go into those deadly armaments in the next decade.

Private contractors now run the nuclear warhead complex and build
nuclear delivery vehicles. They
[range](https://www.dontbankonthebomb.com/nuclear-weapon-producers/)
from Raytheon, General Dynamics, and Lockheed Martin to lesser-known
firms like BWX Technologies and Jacobs Engineering, all of which split
billions of dollars in contracts from the Pentagon (for the production
of nuclear delivery vehicles) and the Department of Energy (for nuclear
warheads). To keep the gravy train running --- ideally, in perpetuity
--- those contractors also spend
[millions](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2021-05/features/inside-icbm-lobby-special-interests-national-interest)
lobbying decision-makers. Even universities have gotten into the act.
Both the University of California and Texas A&M are part of the
[consortium](https://www.chronicle.com/article/u-of-california-and-texas-a-m-win-bid-to-run-birthplace-of-atom-bomb/#:~:text=of%20California%20and%20Texas%20A%26M%20U.,run%20Los%20Alamos%20National%20Laboratory.)
that runs the Los Alamos nuclear weapons laboratory.

The American warhead complex is a [vast
enterprise](https://3ba8a190-62da-4c98-86d2-893079d87083.usrfiles.com/ugd/3ba8a1_3ad999bcc8ff4a289f985db52bb88196.pdf)
with major facilities in California, Missouri, Nevada, New Mexico, South
Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas. And nuclear-armed
[submarines](https://3ba8a190-62da-4c98-86d2-893079d87083.usrfiles.com/ugd/3ba8a1_3ad999bcc8ff4a289f985db52bb88196.pdf),
[bombers](https://www.northropgrumman.com/what-we-do/air/b-21-raider/10-facts-about-northrop-grummans-b-21-raider/),
and
[missiles](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2021-05/features/inside-icbm-lobby-special-interests-national-interest)
are produced or based in California, Connecticut, Georgia, Louisiana,
North Dakota, Montana, Virginia, Washington state, and Wyoming. Add in
nuclear subcontractors and most states host at least some
nuclear-weapons-related activities.

And such beneficiaries of the nuclear weapons industry are far from
silent when it comes to debating the future of nuclear spending and
policy-making.

****Profiteers of Armageddon: The Nuclear Weapons Lobby****

The institutions and companies that build nuclear bombs, missiles,
aircraft, and submarines, along with their allies in Congress, have
played a disproportionate role in shaping U.S. nuclear policy and
spending. They have typically
[opposed](https://carnegieendowment.org/2009/11/03/why-we-don-t-need-to-resume-nuclear-testing-reply-to-senator-jon-kyl-s-why-we-need-to-test-nuclear-weapons-pub-24079)
the U.S. ratification of a Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban treaty; put
[strict limits
](https://3ba8a190-62da-4c98-86d2-893079d87083.usrfiles.com/ugd/3ba8a1_89fe183f8a164e22a2fa29d4d6381d7b.pdf)on
the ability of Congress to reduce either funding for or the deployment
of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs); and
[pushed](https://www.defensenews.com/congress/budget/2023/06/22/gop-moves-to-instate-sea-launched-cruise-missile-nuclear-program/)
for weaponry like a proposed nuclear-armed, sea-launched cruise missile
that even the Pentagon hasn't requested, while [funding think
tanks](https://3ba8a190-62da-4c98-86d2-893079d87083.usrfiles.com/ugd/3ba8a1_c7e3bfc7723d4021b54cbc145ae3f5eb.pdf)
that promote an ever more robust nuclear weapons force.

A case in point is the [Senate ICBM
Coalition](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2021/05/26/meet-the-senate-nuke-caucus-busting-the-budget-and-making-the-world-less-safe/)
(dubbed part of the "[Dr. Strangelove
Caucus](https://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Foreign-Policy/2010/1222/New-START-treaty-How-will-next-efforts-for-nuclear-weapons-reduction-fare)"
by Arms Control Association Director Daryl Kimball and other critics of
nuclear arms). The ICBM Coalition [consists
of](https://3ba8a190-62da-4c98-86d2-893079d87083.usrfiles.com/ugd/3ba8a1_89fe183f8a164e22a2fa29d4d6381d7b.pdf)
senators from states with major ICBM bases or ICBM research,
maintenance, and production sites: Montana, North Dakota, Utah, and
Wyoming. The sole Democrat in the group, Jon Tester (D-MT), is the
[chair](https://www.tester.senate.gov/about/issues/national-security-military/)
of the powerful appropriations subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations
Committee, where he can keep an eye on ICBM spending and advocate for it
as needed.

The Senate ICBM Coalition is responsible for numerous measures aimed at
protecting both the funding and deployment of such deadly missiles.
[According
to](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/30/opinion/why-its-safe-to-scrap-americas-icbms.html)
former Secretary of Defense William Perry, they are among "the most
dangerous weapons we have" because a president, if warned of a possible
nuclear attack on this country, would have just minutes to decide to
launch them, risking a nuclear conflict based on a false alarm. That
Coalition's efforts are supplemented by persistent lobbying from a
series of [local
coalitions](https://thebulletin.org/2020/10/nuclear-disarmers-cant-forget-the-communities-that-rely-on-military-spending/)
of business and political leaders in those ICBM states. Most of them
work closely with Northrop Grumman, the prime contractor for the new
ICBM, dubbed the Sentinel and expected to
[cost](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-10-03/new-u-s-icbms-could-cost-up-to-264-billion-over-decades?in_source=embedded-checkout-banner)
at least \$264 billion to develop, build, and maintain over its life
span that is expected to exceed 60 years.

Of course, Northrop Grumman and its [12 major ICBM
subcontractors](https://www.defenseone.com/business/2019/09/northrop-icbm/159886/)
have been busy pushing the Sentinel as well. They spend [tens of
millions of dollars
](https://www.opensecrets.org/industries/indus.php?Ind=D)on campaign
contributions and lobbying annually, while
[employing](https://www.pogo.org/report/2018/11/brass-parachutes) former
members of the government's nuclear establishment to make their case to
Congress and the executive branch. And those are hardly the only
organizations or networks devoted to sustaining the nuclear arms race.
You would have to include the [Air Force
Association](https://www.afa.org/) and the obscurely named [Submarine
Industrial Base Council](https://submarinesuppliers.org/), among others.

The biggest point of leverage the nuclear weapons industry and the arms
sector more broadly have over Congress is jobs. How strange then that
the arms industry has generated diminishing job returns since the end of
the Cold War. According to the National Defense Industrial Association,
direct employment in the weapons industry has
[dropped](https://www.ndia.org/about/press/press-releases/2020/2/5/vitalsigns)
from 3.2 million in the mid-1980s to about 1.1 million today.

Even a relatively small slice of the Pentagon and Department of Energy
nuclear budgets could create [many more
jobs](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2023/One-pager%20on%20Heidi%27s%20paper-3.pdf)
if invested in green energy, sustainable infrastructure, education, or
public health -- anywhere from 9% to 250% more jobs, depending on the
amount spent. Given that the climate crisis is already well underway,
such a shift would not only make this country more prosperous but the
world safer by slowing the pace of climate-driven catastrophes and
offering at least some protection against its worst manifestations.

****A New Nuclear Reckoning?****

Count on one thing: by itself, a movie focused on the origin of nuclear
weapons, no matter how powerful, won't force a new reckoning with the
costs and consequences of America's continued addiction to them. But a
wide variety of peace, arms-control, health, and public-policy-focused
groups are already building on the attention garnered by the film to
engage in a public education campaign aimed at reviving a movement to
control and eventually eliminate the nuclear danger.

Past experience --- from the [Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament
](https://cnduk.org/)that helped persuade Christopher Nolan to make
**Oppenheimer **to the "[Ban the
Bomb](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/10/nuclear-disarmament-activists-putin-ukraine)"
and [Nuclear Freeze
](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2010_12/LookingBack)campaigns that
stopped above-ground nuclear testing and helped turn President Ronald
Reagan around on the nuclear issue --- suggests that, given concerted
public pressure, progress can be made on reining in the nuclear threat.
The public education effort surrounding the Oppenheimer film is being
taken up by groups like **The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, **the
Federation of American Scientists, and the Council for a Livable World
that were founded, at least in part, by Manhattan Project scientists who
devoted their lives to trying to roll back the nuclear arms race;
professional groups like the Union of Concerned Scientists and
Physicians for Social Responsibility; anti-war groups like Peace Action
and Win Without War; the Nobel Peace prize-winning International
Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons; nuclear policy groups like Global
Zero and the Arms Control Association; advocates for Marshall Islanders,
"downwinders," and other victims of the nuclear complex; and faith-based
groups like the Friends Committee on National Legislation. The Native
American****--****led organization Tewa Women United has even created a
[website](https://tewawomenunited.org/2023/07/oppenheimer-and-the-other-side-of-the-story),
"Oppenheimer --- and the Other Side of the Story," that focuses on "the
Indigenous and land-based peoples who were displaced from our homelands,
the poisoning and contamination of sacred lands and waters that
continues to this day, and the ongoing devastating impact of nuclear
colonization on our lives and livelihoods."

On the global level, the 2021 entry into force of a nuclear ban treaty
--- officially known as the [Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons
](https://www.nti.org/education-center/treaties-and-regimes/treaty-on-the-prohibition-of-nuclear-weapons/)---
is a sign of hope, even if the nuclear weapons states have yet to join.
The very existence of such a treaty does at least help delegitimize
nuclear weaponry. It has even prompted
[dozens](https://www.dontbankonthebomb.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/PAX_Rapport_DBotB_Risky-Returns_FINAL_web_spread.pdf)
of major financial institutions to stop investing in the nuclear weapons
industry, under pressure from campaigns like [Don't Bank on the
Bomb](https://www.dontbankonthebomb.com/).

In truth, the situation couldn't be simpler: we need to [abolish nuclear
weapons](https://www.armscontrol.org/events/2021-03/ending-nuclear-weapons-before-they-end-us-opportunities-under-biden-administration)
before they abolish us. Hopefully, **Oppenheimer **will help prepare the
ground for progress in that all too essential undertaking, beginning
with a frank discussion of what's now at stake.

Copyright 2023 William D. Hartung

Featured image: [Atom Bomb Nuclear
Explosion](https://flickr.com/photos/51686021@N07/33230171512/in/photolist-SCrjgA-2ntzHdi-2jyvcDw-2kpinZ6-J4HuYA-389Fsx-S9Rk8o-2iBAoHi-2ocJqVn-oQGQf-UqtWrw-XuACfa-Z613uJ-vuZc3D-2iANYQR-7f4jfr-kuQfuD-7f8k5o-k5WjR-2ofYMpd-TCqCvG-RmUK9h-PJCdp6-2aQ4cTQ-VK74Td-2cQQyKf-btoJgR-5ySfxU-zF5JL-RsLYuW-2c13hTD-g2rhrh-2ccXyC2-3qqjeq-RmWY8j-2e8skja-zF5HX-2gZr2Xs-2jxbz49-mp6m4K-8vm6Bw-66RyB4-2doGTWV-qmT7s4-6MmWBB-WDWscd-9NJTxs-msAbyK-7UWHnT-2ox91Zx)
by [Burnt Pineapple
Productions](https://flickr.com/photos/51686021@N07/) is licensed under
[CC0 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) / Flickr

**Follow TomDispatch on **[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)** and
join us on **[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)**. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, **[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel **[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**, and
Tom Engelhardt's **[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
as well as Alfred McCoy's **[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
John Dower's **[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
**and Ann Jones's** [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

****William D. Hartung****, a [**TomDispatch
**](https://tomdispatch.com/what-price-defense-2/)[regular](https://tomdispatch.com/what-price-defense-2/),
is a senior research fellow at the Quincy Institute for Responsible
Statecraft and the author of \"[**More Money, Less Security: Pentagon
Spending and Strategy in the Biden
Administration**](https://quincyinst.org/report/more-money-less-security-pentagon-spending-and-strategy-in-the-biden-administration/).\"

Many thanks to the author and \<a
href="[http://TomDispatch.com](http://TomDispatch.com/)"\>
TomDispatch.com\</a\>

## 
