# The Associative Principle

### its application in the air transport industry

![](swissair.jpg)

## by Francis Tate (Frank Thomas Smith)


**Author's note**: This article was originally published in
*Interavia,* a leading Geneva based aviation trade magazine, in May
1975. At the time, the international airlines met regularly to set
fares, conditions of travel and practically all elements of
international air transportation. This was done within their trade
organization, the International Air Transport Association (IATA). Fare
setting was possible because IATA had been granted exemption from
anti-trust laws. If this sounds unusual today, it did not seem strange
then, because air transportation was still considered to be a public
service and therefore needful of special government protection. A few
years after the article was published, however, the U.S. government
rescinded the anti-trust exemption and most other governments were
eventually forced to follow suit.

The result, "open skies", resulted in a savage dog-eat-dog
competition, finally culminating in the bankruptcy and disappearance
of many airlines; most of them United States flag carriers. To name a
few: Panam, Panagra, TWA, Eastern, Braniff. Most non-U.S. carriers
were government owned and/or protected, and better able to survive,
although even state owned Latin American airlines succumbed: Viasa,
Aeroperu, Varig (recently), etc. In Europe Sabena, and even I was
surprised when Swissair, arguably the best airline of all,
disappeared. Airline travelers who are old enough to remember will not
have to be told about the sharp decline in passenger service, the
increase in delays, missed connections, etc., despite much improved
technology.

I cannot say I foresaw the totality of the disaster, but I did think
that the anti-trust immunity could not last (there were already
rumblings about it), so I wrote the following article. As an employee
of IATA, I was contractually obliged to submit the article to top
management for approval. The Director General at the time, Knut
Hammarskjold, who apparently personally agreed with the sentiments
expressed, finally agreed, but with the proviso that it not appear
under my name. (IATA could not appear to be endorsing a concept with
the airlines themselves would probably not accept.) Therefore it
appeared as having been written by "Francis Tate", without the usual
bio.

I am not republishing the article now in order to say "I told you so",
but merely to suggest that the "Associative Principle" is still valid,
not only for the airline industry, but for industry in general.

FTS

![](triangle.jpg)


**Almost overnight**, consumerism has become a household word
integrated into vocabularies of the world's languages. The consumer
has become aware of his rights and of the influence which he is in a
position lo exert on the economic process trough concerted action. In
the air transport field the consumer-passengers have begun to organize
and demand their rights; even to the extent of over-reaction in the
form of emotionalism, headline-hunting and court actions against
airlines, travel agencies and even governmental regulatory bodies. The
airlines and, to a lesser extent, the travel agents, who have had
things their own way for a long time, are beginning to realize that it
takes three to tango in economic enterprises: producers, distributors
and consumers.

 

**Trade associations**

 

The producer-airlines have long had their own trade associations,
principally the International Air Transport Association (IATA) and the
US domestic Air Transport Association (ATA), while other regional
associations have more recently appeared on the scene. These are
unique organizations within which, at least in the case of IATA,
member airlines are allowed to meet regularly and openly fix fares,
cargo rates and other conditions of transportation in spite of strict
anti-trust laws. The explanation for this extraordinary situation is
that governments recognize the importance of the public service nature
of air transport, as well as the great complexity of the international
relations which are involved in its make-up. The individual states,
even those which own their national carriers outright, are obliged to
concede the indispensability of these associations because they are
aware that their own bureaucratic nature prevents them from performing
the functions of an IATA themselves. Most are conscious of the fact
that if there were no IATA, the political states would have to take
over its functions, and the ensuing chaos is eminently predictable.

The distributor-travel agents also have their trade associations on a
local, regional and international level. It is only recently however,
that a spirit of cooperation has become visible in the relations
between the international airline and agent bodies. The airlines fear
that organized agents might eventually succeed in squeezing more and /
or unreasonable commissions out of their already bleeding pocketbooks.
On the other side there has been considerable resentment amongst
agents, who have felt that the airlines have been acting arbitrarily
in refusing even to discuss this point seriously with them. The
situation has evolved however, to the point where IATA and UFTAA
(Universal Federation of Travel Agents Associations) are having
regular contacts and where even the president of UFTAA, P. Bamberger,
has expressed "high hopes and beliefs" that acceptable solutions will
be found to differences between the two organizations. In a recent
meeting of the IATA Industry Policy Committee, chaired by IATA's
Director General, Knut Hammarskjold, member airlines finally decided
to meet the commission question head-on, by recommending that their
Traffic Committee continue discussions with travel agency
organizations with a view to coming to an agreement concerning
commissions as well as other outstanding airline-agency questions such
as joint market development, cooperative advertising, wholesaler
compensation and even compliance, which has long been an irritating
factor. The Policy Committee went so far as to say that in its opinion
"the Traffic Committee should consider any short-term solution in
relation to a long-term policy...".

Once the differences are resolved however, or even before, it
will be necessary to *work together*-not to merely stop fighting. An
outstanding example of what can be achieved through cooperation is the
IATA/UFTAA jointly sponsored Agents' Professional Training Course
which, as it gradually expands over the globe, is greatly increasing
the degree of professionalism in the travel industry. These beginnings
are to be applauded, but much more is needed for the development of a
truly rational air transport policy: the third corner of the triangle
is empty and the consumer-passengers are still on the outside looking
in.

 

**What about the Consumer?**

 

One of the basic principles of economic enterprise - the
Associative Principle - is mostly overlooked and only partially
practiced in certain public service industries, although conditions
make it so clearly appropriate that one wonders why those responsible
are not more conscious of it. Perhaps, as is so often the case,
because it is so obvious.

The Associative Principle is based upon another, largely
unrealized fact of life: that work is essentially of a fraternal
nature. This can be clearly seen, as an example, at a modern assembly
line, where the division of labour has been carried to such an extreme
that the workers have become, in a sense, its victims. Each worker
usually performs one or few actions which, together with many other
sim ilar actions by other workers, eventually results in a finished
product, whether it be a pair of shoes, a suit, an automobile or an
aircraft. Other contributors to the production of the end-product are
the designer, the engineer, manager, clerical workers and so on. The
answer to the question: For whom did they produce the aircraft or the
shoes? is: not for themselves, but for others. This working for others
is a fraternal process, be it conscious or not, and these "others"
have acquired a specific designation in economic terminology:
consumers.

The fraternal nature of the air transport industry is often
expressed differently. It is called a public service industry, which
it certainly is, and this public service consists of providing safe,
regular and economic air transportation to the public, that is, to
"others". If we recognize that the reason we occupy ourselves with
selling air tickets or servicing aircraft or flying them or writing
about all these things, is to serve the needs of the
consumer-passengers, then we must look for a method of performing this
activity which is not only the most efficient, but which also
corresponds to the fraternal nature of the activity. The appropriate
method is the Associative Method, a phenomenon which has already
appeared on the horizon, but which is not yet clearly recognized.

 

**The principle**

 
In the air transport industry we have:

1. airline associations;
2. travel agents associations;
3. Passengers associations (consumer groups).

     

The Associative Principle indicates that the producers, the
distributers and the consumers, the three groups directly involved in
any economic process, should associate in order to arrive at the
solutions to their common problems. Each is equally important and
should have an equal voice in the decision-making process. (Efforts to
"eliminate the middle man" in order to bring prices down are sheer
nonsense. The middlemen perform a function which in fact causes prices
to be lower in the long run than they otherwise would be, since
neither the producer nor the consumer can consistently perform it as
efficiently as they can).

Presently, with the exception of the example cited above, the
three types of associations are generally engaged in fighting
*against* each other in egotistic self-interest, instead of
cooperating *with* each other for the benefit of the common interest.
As separate, unassociated (with each other) groups, this is the type
of conduct which must be expected from them. No passenger, as things
stand, when the airlines offer him a fare of 100 dollars is likely to
object, "No, that is too little for your needs, After all, you must
pay off the debt incurred because of these new aircraft you bought,
not to mention agents' commissions, landing fees, navigation fees,
excessive fuel prices, inflation and God only knows what else. I will
pay 120 dollars". This is perhaps a grotesque example. Nevertheless,
in integrated associations all three sides will be able to survey the
overall picture and work together for what their new insight will show
them to be the best possible course of action, even though one group's
immediate profit may be sacrificed. The common interest will be seen
as the essential element in the decision making process.

The general, but not absolute, tendency of airlines as producers
of air transportation, like all producers, is to favour higher prices.
(In the case of the non-scheduled charter operators which have opted
for lower prices, we have a situation in which these carriers have
taken advantage of the fact that the scheduled airlines were already
performing the real public service of operating regularly scheduled
flights, and the undercutting of fares was possible only because they
themselves were not required to perform this service.) The passengers
tend to favour lower prices and the travel agent is in the middle,
knowing that low fares enable him to sell more, but realizing at the
same time that the higher the fare, the larger his commission will be.
He would therefore tend to assume the mediator's role on the fares
question in an association comprised of the representatives of the
three groups.

The passenger would assume the mediating role in such questions as
agency commissions and productivity norms, and the airlines would take
it over when such problems as inclusive tour services, credit
arrangements, cargo agents' disbursement fees, etc., are discussed.

 

**Ideally...**

 

*Human reason* could make its debut. For instance, no
knowledgeable passenger representative would demand a fare which is
economically unviable if he is present at the moment of decision on
what the fare should be and participates in that decision, instead of
merely being informed of the fare he must pay after it has been
unilaterally decided upon by the airlines. In the open and fraternal
atmosphere of an integrated association, each group's demands would be
agreed to only to the extent they are justifiable and are seen to
contribute to the mutual benefit of all concerned.

It should be noted that once the consumer-passengers are in a
position to represent their own interests as members of integrated
associations, it will no longer be necessary for political states to
act as defenders of their interests. Therefore, an extremely important
side-effect of the Associative Method is the reduction of governmental
influence and interference in what is essentially an economic and not
a political enterprise.

The necessary elements for the realization of the Associative
Principle are already with us in the form of separate associations of
airlines, travel agents and passengers. When these three basic groups
form *integrated* associations, then a giant stride toward a healthy
air transport industry will have been taken.

This article may be freely reproduced with the condition that the
source be given.
