# Beyond Belief

![St. Thomas, apostle](thomas-apostle.jpg){class="a"}  

### The Secret Gospel of Thomas

## by Elaine Pagels
 
Published 2003 by Random House, New York

Elaine Pagels, professor of religion at Princeton University,
became famous – well, at least well known – with the publication
of her book, *The Gnostic Gospels, *in 1979. She has written
several other books as well on the history of Christianity,
establishing her as the foremost popular scholar in the field.

 

*Beyond Belief*, published in 2003 by Random House, is a sort of
sequel to The Secret Gospels, in that it incorporates the new
scholarship that has come to light since that book was published.
Since Ms. Pagels' infant son was diagnosed with fatal pulmonary
hypertension, her pursuit of knowledge about who Jesus really was
has become a question of personal urgency for her. This need is
reflected in the text and transforms the book into much more than
a scholarly treatise for the curious. She wants to know what
Christ meant to his followers before doctrine and dogmas, in other
words, before Christianity was invented by the Church.

 

The discovery of the Gospel of Thomas, along with other early
Christian texts, offers revealing clues. Pagels compares Thomas’s
gospel (which claims to give Jesus’ secret teaching, and indicates
an affinity with the Kabbalah) with the canonic texts to show how
the early Church chose to include some gospels and exclude others
from the collection we know as the New Testament – and why. During
the time of persecution of Christians, the church fathers
constructed the canon, creed and hierarchy, suppressing many of
its spiritual resources in the process, in order to avoid conflict
with Roman law and religion.

 

A prime example is the label of heresy attached to the Gospel of
Thomas, and its subsequent suppression. If a copy hadn’t been
found by accident (or destiny?) in the caves of Nag Hammadi, along
with many other documents during the middle of the twentieth
century, we’d have never even known of its existence. Such secret
writings had been denounced by Irenaeus, bishop of Lyon (c.180) as
“an abyss of madness, and blasphemy against Christ.” Pagels had
therefore expected to find madness and blasphemy in these texts,
but when she first studied them in Harvard graduate school she
found the contrary in sayings such as this from Thomas. “Jesus
said: *If you bring forth what is within you, what you will bring
forth will save you. If you do not bring forth what is within you,
what you do not bring forth will destroy you*. Pagels found that
“..the strength of this saying is that it does not tell us what to
believe but challenges us to discover what lies hidden within
ourselves; and, with a shock of recognition, I realized that this
perspective seemed to me to be self-evidently true.”

 

However, certain church leaders from the second through the fourth
centuries rejected many of these sources of revelation and
constructed instead the New Testament gospel canon of Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, which has defined Christianity to this day.
The Gospel of John is of special importance in church dogma, and
its basic tenets seem to be in direct opposition to Thomas. John
says that he writes “so that you may *believe*, *and believing*
may have life in \[Jesus’\] name.” Thomas’s gospel, however,
encourages us not so much to *believe in Jesus, *as John demands,
as to *seek to know God *through one’s own, divinely given
capacity, since all are created in the image of God. “For
Christians of later generations, the Gospel of John helped provide
a foundation for a unified church, which Thomas, with its emphasis
on each person’s search for God, did not.”

 

According to Pagels, John is the only evangelist who actually
states that Jesus is God incarnated. But not only Pagels says so.
In one of his commentaries on John, Origen – a church father,
(c.240)  - writes that while the other gospels describe Jesus as
human, “none of them clearly spoke of his divinity, as John does.”
One may object that the other three, synoptic (“seeing together”)
gospels call Jesus “son of God”, and this is virtually the same
thing. But such titles (son of God, messiah) in Jesus’ time
designated human, not divine roles. When translated into English
fifteen centuries later, these were capitalized – a linguistic
convention that does not occur in the original Greek. When all
four gospels, together with Paul’s letters, were united in the New
Testament (c. 160 to 360) most Christians had come to read all
four through John’s lens, that Jesus is “Lord and God”.

 

Pagels feels that if the Gospel of Thomas were included in the New
Testament instead of that of John, or even if it were included
along with John, the development of Christianity would have been
quite different. Whereas Mark, Matthew and Luke identify Jesus as
God’s human agent, John and Thomas characterize him as God’s own
light in human form. Both claim to reveal, at least to a certain
extent, Jesus’ “secret teachings”, and assume that their readers
are already familiar with the synoptic gospels.

 

Despite their similarities, John and Thomas point the secret
teachings in sharply different directions. John claims that we can
experience God only through the divine light embodied in Jesus,
while Thomas says that the divine light embodied in Jesus is
already shared by humanity since we are all made “in the image of
God”. Thomas thus expresses what would become a central theme of
Jewish, and later Christian, mysticism a thousand years later:
that the “image of God” is hidden within everyone, and it is a
question of recognizing this and finding it through one’s own
efforts.      

 

(On the question of Jesus’ divinity, Rudolf Steiner – not
consulted by Pagels –  offered an interesting solution: that Jesus
was indeed a human being, but that “a god”, Christ, incarnated in
him at the moment of baptism in the Jordan.) 

 

At one point in her description of the dispute among the early
Christians about who Jesus really was, Pagels quotes Mark: *…he
asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?” And they told
him, “John the Baptist; and others say Elijah; and others, one of
the prophets.“ And he asked them, “But who do you say that I am?”
Peter answered him, “You are the messiah.” *In view of this
passage, it has always seemed contradictory to me the contention
that Christianity – and Judaism – do not embrace the idea of
reincarnation, even reject it, when these first Jewish Christians
seem to act as though it were common knowledge.

 

The synoptic gospels claim that Jesus’ teaching predicted the
coming of the kingdom of God some time in the future, an
interpretation still adhered to by many Christians. However, both
John and Thomas say something different, the latter very
specifically: Jesus said, *If those who lead you say to you,
‘Look, the kingdom is in the sky’, then the birds of the sky will
get there before you….If they say to you, ‘It is in the sea,’ then
the fish will get there before you. *And: *His disciples said to
him, ‘When will the resurrection of the dead come, and when will
the new world come?’ He said to them, ‘What you look forward to
has already come, but you do not recognize it.’ *

* *

Though the Gospel of Luke includes an alternative version of the
same idea (“…the kingdom of God is within you”), Luke later
retreats from this position and concludes with the apocalyptic
warning that the Son of Man is not a divine presence in us all but
a terrifying judge.

 

A century ago Leo Tolstoy, in his monumental *The Kingdom of God
is Within you*, urged Christians to give up coercion and violence
in order to realize God’s kingdom here and now. Thomas Merton, the
twentieth century writer and Trappist monk, agreed with Tolstoy
but interpreted his kingdom mystically rather then practically. We
are confronted here with the Catholic church’s insistence that
humanity is sinful, base and unworthy *by nature* and that
salvation from the pangs of hell is only possible through faith in
Jesus and, by obvious extension, his church, and his
representative on earth, the pope. But the Gospel of Thomas leaves
spiritual destiny up to each individual. There Jesus treats us as
equals, or at least as struggling siblings:

 

> “According to Thomas, Jesus rebukes those who seek access to God
> elsewhere, even—perhaps especially—those who seek it by trying
> to “follow Jesus” himself. When certain disciples plead with
> Jesus to “show us the place where you are, since it is necessary
> for us to seek it,” he does not bother to answer so misguided a
> question and redirects the disciples away from themselves toward
> the light hidden within each person: ‘There is light within a
> person of light, and it lights up the whole universe; If it does
> not shine, there is darkness.’ In other words, one either
> discovers the light within that illuminates ‘the whole universe’
> or lives in darkness, within and without.”  

 

Finally, after so many centuries, the heretics are having their
say. Another most interesting document found at Nag Hammadi is the
Gospel of Philip, who explains baptism. Sometimes the person who
receives baptism “receives the holy spirit…this is what happens
when one experiences a mystery.” Divine grace, this implies, isn’t
sufficient; the initiate’s capacity for spiritual understanding is
also a factor. “Faith is our earth, in which we take root; hope is
the water through which we are nourished; love is the air through
which we grow; *gnosis* is the light through which we become fully
grown.


For translations of the Gospel of Thomas see:
<http://home.epix.net/~miser17/Thomas.html>   
