# Peace Is Not Our Profession

![](mad-2.jpg){class="alarge"}

### The Madness of Nuclear Warfare, Alive and Well in America

## By [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

Hey, cheer up because it truly is a beauty! I'm talking about this
country's latest "stealth bomber," the B-21 Raider, [just
revealed](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/12/02/b-21-bomber-raider-air-force-northrop/)
by [Northrop
Grumman](https://www.northropgrumman.com/what-we-do/air/b-21-raider/10-facts-about-northrop-grummans-b-21-raider/),
the company that makes it, in all its glory. With its striking
bat-winged shape and its ability to deliver a very big bang (as in
nuclear weapons), it's our very own "bomber of the future." As Secretary
of Defense Lloyd Austin put it at its explosive debut, it will "fortify
America's ability to deter aggression, today and into the future." Now,
that truly makes me proud to be an American.

And while you're at it, on this
[MAD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutual_assured_destruction) (as in
mutually assured destruction) world of ours, let that scene, that
peculiar [form of
madness](https://bracingviews.com/2022/11/28/a-peculiar-form-of-american-madness/),
involving the potential end of everything on Planet Earth, sink in. As a
retired Air Force officer, it reminded me all too vividly of my former
service and brought to mind the old motto of the [Strategic Air
Command](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategic_Air_Command) (SAC),
"Peace Is Our Profession." Headed in its proudest years by the notorious
[General Curtis LeMay](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curtis_LeMay), it
promised "peace" via the threat of the total nuclear annihilation of
America's enemies.Â 

[]{#anchor}SAC long controlled two "legs" of this country's nuclear
triad: its land-based bombers and intercontinental ballistic missiles,
or ICBMs. During the Cold War, those Titans, Minutemen, and MX
"Peacekeepers" were kept on constant alert, ready to pulverize much of
the planet at a moment's notice. It didn't matter that this country was
likely to be pulverized, too, in any war with the Soviet Union. What
mattered was remaining atop the nuclear pile. A concomitant benefit was
keeping conventional wars from spinning out of control by threatening
the nuclear option or, as was said at the time, "[going
nuclear](https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/is-trump-changing-the-definition-of-go-nuclear)."
(In the age of Biden, it's
"[Armageddon](https://www.cnn.com/2022/10/07/politics/joe-biden-vladimir-putin-armageddon-analysis/index.html).")

Luckily, since the atomic destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945,
the world hasn't gone nuclear again and yet this country's military
continues, with the help of weapons makers like Northrop Grumman, to
hustle down that very path to Armageddon. Once upon a time, the
absurdity of all this was captured by Stanley Kubrick's masterpiece, the
satirical 1964 film [**Dr.
Strangelove**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dr._Strangelove), which
featured a "war room" in which there was [no
fighting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UAeqVGP-GPM), even as its
occupants oversaw a nuclear doomsday. Sadly enough, that movie still
seems eerily relevant nearly 60 years later in a world lacking the
Soviet Union, where the threat of nuclear war nonetheless looms ever
larger. What gives?

The short answer is that America's leaders, like their counterparts in
Russia and China, seem to have a collective death wish, a shared
willingness to embrace the most violent and catastrophic weapons in the
name of peace.

***Nuclear Bombers and ICBMs Return!***

There's nothing magical about the nuclear triad. It's [not the Holy
"Trinity](https://www.csmonitor.com/layout/set/amphtml/1982/1210/121054.html),"
as a congressman from Florida said long ago. Even so, it's worshipped by
the U.S. military in its own all-too-expensive fashion. America's triad
consists of bombers capable of carrying nuclear weapons (B-52s, B-1s,
B-2s, and someday B-21s), those land-based ICBMs, and that most
survivable "leg," the U.S. Navy's Trident-missile-firing submarines. No
other country has a triad quite as impressive (if that's the word for
it), nor is any other country planning to spend up to [\$2
trillion](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7)
over the next three decades "modernizing" it. The Air Force, of course,
controls the first two legs of that triad and isn't about to give them
up just because they're redundant to America's "defense" (given those
submarines), while constituting a threat to life on this planet.

Recently, when the Air Force
[unveiled](https://www.reuters.com/business/aerospace-defense/northrop-grumman-set-unveil-b-21-nuclear-bomber-us-air-force-2022-12-02/)
that [B-21
Raider](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-enabling-armageddon/),
its latest nuclear-capable bomber, we learned that it looks much like
its predecessor, the B-2 Spirit, with its bat-like shape (known as a
"flying wing" design) driven by stealth or the avoidance of radar
detection. The Air Force plans to buy "at least" 100 of those planes at
a projected cost of roughly \$750 million each. Count on one thing,
though: with the inevitable delays and cost overruns associated with any
high-tech military project these days, the flyaway cost will likely
exceed \$1 billion per plane, or at least \$100 billion of your taxpayer
dollars (and possibly even [\$200
billion](https://www.commondreams.org/news/2022/12/02/millions-americans-lack-adequate-health-coverage-pentagon-has-new-nuclear-bomber)).

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Four years ago, when I first
[wrote](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-enabling-armageddon/)
about the B-21, its estimated cost was \$550 million per plane, but you
know the story, right? [The
F-35](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-a-wasteful-weapon-for-america-s-forever-wars/)
was supposed to be a low-cost, multi-role fighter jet. A generation
later, by the Air Force's own admission, it's now a [staggeringly
expensive
"Ferrari"](https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2021/02/23/the-us-air-force-just-admitted-the-f-35-stealth-fighter-has-failed/?sh=bdf0591b169b)
of a plane, sexy in appearance but [laden with
flaws](https://www.esquire.com/news-politics/politics/a35631305/f-35-doesnt-work-1-7-trillion-dollars/).
Naturally, the B-21 is advertised as a multi-role bomber that can carry
"conventional" or non-nuclear munitions as well as thermonuclear ones,
but its main reason for being is its alleged ability to put nuclear
bombs on target, even without Slim Pickens ("Major Kong" in Kubrick's
**Dr. Strangelove**) [riding
down](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=snTaSJk0n_Y) on one of them.

The main arguments for expensive nuclear bombers are that they can be
launched as a show of resolve but also, unlike missiles, recalled, if
necessary. (Or so we hope anyway.) They have a "man in the loop" for
greater targeting flexibility and so complicate the enemy's defensive
planning. Such arguments may have made some sense in the 1950s and early
1960s, before ICBMs and their sub-launched equivalents were fully mature
technologies, but they're stuff and nonsense today. If nuclear-capable
nations like Russia and China aren't already deterred by the hundreds of
missiles with thousands of highly accurate nuclear warheads in America's
possession, they're not about to be deterred by a few dozen, or even
100, new B-21 stealth bombers, no matter the recent [Hollywood-style
hype](https://spoilsofwar.substack.com/p/b-21-bomber-the-200-billion-tv-commercial)
about them.

Yet logic couldn't matter less here. What matters is that the Air Force
has had nuclear-capable bombers since those first modified B-29s that
dropped [Little Boy and Fat
Man](https://www.atomicheritage.org/history/little-boy-and-fat-man) on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and the generals are simply not about to give
them up --- ever. Meanwhile, building any sophisticated weapons system
like the B-21 is sure to employ tens of thousands of workers. (There are
already [400 parts
suppliers](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/dec/03/pentagon-new-strategic-bomber-counter-china)
for the B-21 scattered across 40 states to ensure the undying love of
the most congressional representatives imaginable.) It's also a
boondoggle for America's many merchants of death, especially the lead
contractor, Northrop Grumman.

A reader at my [**Bracing
Views**](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/wheres-the-antiwar-movement)
Substack, a Vietnam veteran, nailed it when he described his own
reaction to the B-21's unveiling:

"What struck me in my heart (fortunately, I have a great pacemaker) was
the self-assured, almost condescending demeanor of the Secretary \[of
Defense\], the Hollywood staging and lighting, and the complete absence
of consideration of what cognitive/emotional/moral injuries might be
inflicted on the viewer, never mind experiencing exposure to the actual
bomber and its payload --- add in the incredible cost and use of
taxpayer money for a machine and support system that can never actually
be used, or if used, would produce incalculable destruction of people
and planet; again, never mind how all that could have been used to start
making America into a functioning social democracy instead of a
declining, tottering empire."

Social democracy? Perish the thought. The U.S. economy is propped up by
a militarized Keynesianism tightly embraced by Congress and whatever
administration is in the White House. So, no matter how unnecessary
those bombers may be, no matter how their costs spiral ever upwards,
they're likely to endure. Look for them flying over a sports stadium
near you, perhaps in 2030 --- if, that is, we're still alive as a
species.

As the Air Force buys new stealth bombers with your tax dollars, they
also plan to purchase a new generation of ICBMs, or a "ground-based
strategic deterrent" in Newspeak, to plant in missile silos in garden
spots like rural Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, and Wyoming. The Air
Force has had ICBMs since the 1960s. Roughly 1,000 of them (though that
service initially requested
[**10,000**](https://bracingviews.com/2017/12/28/the-doomsday-machine-the-madness-of-americas-nuclear-weapons/))
were kept on high alert well into the 1980s. Today's ICBM force is
smaller, but ever more expensive to maintain due to its age. It's also
redundant, thanks to the Navy's more elusive and survivable nuclear
deterrent. But, again, logic doesn't matter here. Whether needed or not,
the Air Force wants those new land-based missiles just like those
stealth bombers and Congress is all too willing to fund them in your
name.

Ka-ching! But hopefully not ka-boom!

Just as the purchase price for the B-21 project is expected to start at
\$100 billion (but will likely [far
exceed](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-11-17/under-wraps-b-21-bomber-is-seen-costing-203-billion-into-2050s#xj4y7vzkg)
that), the new ICBMs, known as Sentinels, are also estimated to cost
\$100 billion. It brings to mind [an old
saying](https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/minute/Senator_Everett_Mckinley_Dirksen_Dies.htm)
(slightly updated): a hundred billion here, a hundred billion there, and
pretty soon you're talking real money. In a case of egregious
double-dipping, Northrop Grumman is once again the lead contractor,
having recently opened a [\$1.4 billion
facility](https://www.defensenews.com/air/2022/04/05/heres-the-new-name-of-the-us-air-forces-next-gen-nuke/)
to design the new missile in Colorado Springs, conveniently close to the
Air Force Academy and various other Air and Space Force facilities.
Location, location, location!

Why such nuclear folly? The usual reasons, of course. Building genocidal
missiles creates jobs. It's a boon and a half for the industrial part of
the military-industrial-congressional complex. It's considered "healthy"
for the communities where those missiles will be located, rural areas
that would suffer economically if the Air Force bases there were instead
dismantled or decommissioned. For that service, shiny new ICBMs are a
budget bonanza, while helping to ensure that the real "enemy" --- and
yes, I have the U.S. Navy in mind --- won't end up with a monopoly on
world-ending weaponry.

In the coming decades, expect those "Sentinels" to be planted in fields
far from where most Americans live under the guiding principle that, if
we keep them out of sight, they'll be out of mind as well. Yet I can't
help but think that this country's military is out of its mind in
"planting" them there when the only harvest can be of mass death.

***It's a MAD Old World***

As **MAD** magazine's Alfred E. Neuman would undoubtedly have said,
"What, me worry?"

Oh, MAD old world that has such nukes in it! Color me astonished, in
fact, that America's nuclear weapons mix hasn't changed much since the
1960s. That sort of world-ending persistence should tell us something,
but what exactly? For one thing, that not enough of us can imagine a
brave new world without genocidal nuclear weapons in it.

In 1986, President Ronald Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev
actually did so. They came close, in fact, to reaching a deal to
[eliminate nuclear
weapons](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2006-09/looking-back-1986-reykjavik-summit).
Sadly, Reagan proved reluctant to abandon his dream of a nuclear space
shield, then popularly known as "Star Wars" or, more formally, as the
Strategic Defense Initiative. Since Reagan, sadly enough, U.S.
presidents have stayed the course on nukes. Most disappointingly, the
[Nobel
Prize-winning](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/09/nobel-peace-prize-barack-obama)
Barack Obama spoke of eliminating them, supported by former [Cold War
stalwarts](https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB116787515251566636) like Henry
Kissinger and George Schultz, only to abandon that goal, partly to
solidify support in the Senate for a nuclear deal with Iran that, no
less sadly, is itself [pretty much
dead](https://www.latimes.com/opinion/story/2022-07-21/iran-nuclear-deal-joe-biden-ebrahim-raisi-united-states-jcpoa)
and buried today.

If saintly Reagan and saintly Obama couldn't do it, what hope do
ordinary Americans have of ending our nuclear MADness? Well, to quote a
real saint, Catholic peace activist Dorothy Day, "Our problems stem from
our acceptance of this filthy, rotten system." It's hard to think of a
system more filthy or rotten than one that threatens to destroy most
life on our planet, so that this country could in some fashion "win"
World War III.

Win what, exactly? A burnt cinder of a planet?

Look, I've known airmen who've piloted nuclear bombers. I've known
[missileers](https://www.afmissileers.org/) responsible for warheads
that could kill millions (if ever launched). My brother guarded ICBM
silos when he was a security policeman in SAC. I sat in the Air Force's
missile-warning center at [Cheyenne
Mountain](https://www.thenation.com/article/archive/leaving-cheyenne-mountain/)
under 2,000 feet of solid granite as we ran computerized war games that
ended in... yep, mutually assured destruction. We were, at least
individually, not insane. We were doing our duty, following orders,
preparing for the worst, while (most of us, anyway) hoping for the best.

A word of advice: don't look for those within this [nightmarish
system](https://bracingviews.com/2022/05/21/the-murderous-madness-of-trillions-for-nuclear-weapons/)
to change it, not when our elected representatives are part of the very
military-industrial complex that sustains this MADness. Only an alert
and knowledgeable citizenry, with real freedom, could act to do so for
the benefit of humanity. But will we ever do that?Â 

"We're going backwards as a country," my wife reminds me --- and I fear
that she's right. She summarized the hoopla at the B-21's recent
unveiling this way: "Let's go gaga over a mass-murder machine."

Collectively, it seems that we may be on the verge of returning to a
nightmarish past, where we lived in fear of a nuclear war that would
kill us all, the tall and the small, and especially the smallest among
us, our children, who really are our future.

My fear: that we've already become comfortably numb to it and no longer
can take on that culture of mass death. I say this with great sadness,
as an American citizen and a human being. Â Â 

No matter. At least a few of us will have profited from building new
ultra-expensive stealth bombers and shiny new missiles, while ensuring
that mushroom clouds remain somewhere in our collective future. Isn't
that what life is truly all about?

Copyright 2022 William J. Astore

Featured image: [No Nuclear
War](https://flickr.com/photos/alisdare/51923981694/in/photolist-2n7kYKG-2n5DJc2-2iy1mRf-28UxzBW-GuMj7X-NwAUf-2nWkguh-2n4WmFN-6cL6Cf-2nSfpzG-Z81ijb-L3Jzwr-zydqMs-2na4sdk-2nnCMGg-9mtYPA-Lg7Lp5-5qWSAM-2o1A8dg-2nZqj36-T5S7WU-2mVf5Zg-2n66Gxn-JFgeaR-cRLqSw-2n7bF33-2nkzmSR-2nz5bQk-2n6d8xc-Au3cM7-RuEbiC-2ceRMAB-2n6izSx-2ceRSag-2n7kNnx-2o1kuhV-2n7jHM4-EDJTit-2cwf54L-s2jZh-s2m8g-s2kgo-6T83q8-PSkPqK-2n7whU9-2ceGor8-PS1tCr-2cew274-2cwrsk7-2nbHm8r)
by [Alisdare Hickson](https://flickr.com/photos/alisdare/) is licensed
under [CC BY-SA 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/) /
Flickr

**FollowÂ TomDispatchÂ onÂ **[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)**Â and
join us onÂ **[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)**. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopianÂ novel,Â **[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**Â (the
final one in his Splinterlands series),Â Beverly Gologorsky's
novelÂ **[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,Â and
Tom Engelhardt'sÂ **[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
as well as Alfred McCoy'sÂ **[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
John Dower'sÂ **[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
**and Ann Jones's** [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

***William J. Astore***, a retired lieutenant colonel (USAF) and
professor of history, is
aÂ [**TomDispatch**](https://tomdispatch.com/integrity-optional/)[Â regular](https://tomdispatch.com/integrity-optional/)Â and
a senior fellow at the Eisenhower Media Network (EMN), an organization
of critical veteran military and national security national security
professionals. His personal blog isÂ [**Bracing
Views**](https://bracingviews.com/).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/) where this article originally appeared without the title image.
