![](favela-cover){class="a"}

## by Ute Craemer

### Chapter 2

Londrina, September 18, 1965

The visits seem never to end. High society rushes to the favela with
Brazilian beginner\'s zeal. Favela social work is the current craze. My
head reels from so many new faces bubbling with torrents of Brazilian
sounds. I am so confused by all this that my brain cells can no longer
differentiate between Portuguese, French. Serbo-Croatian and Russian.

A comical side of our life is the constant shuttling between the
poorest, shabbiest part of Londrina and the city\'s prominence. Suddenly
it\'s \"to the mayor!\" and we hastily wipe the red dust from our shoes
and the red ring from under our fingernails (*po*, dust, is the number
one subject during embarrassed silences instead of the weather), try to
cover up flea-bites, rip off the favela clothes and rush to the
prefectura (city-hall).

We hardly arrive home with our faces stiff from smiling when the next
visitor is announced: a German family which is \"developing\" in
Bolivia. They no sooner leave than two nuns arrive who are in turn
replaced by the business manager of Fuganti\'s, Paraná \'s Macys.

The following is a song about a child from a Rio favela who died because
\"there is no telephone in the favela to call a doctor and no car to
fetch him\".

> > Acender as Velas (Light the Candles)
> > 
> > O doutor chegou tarde demais\
> > porque no morro\
> > nao tem automovél pra subir\
> > Nao tem telefone pra chamar\
> > e nao tem beleza pra se ver\
> > e a gente morre\
> > sem querer morrer.

(The doctor comes too late because there is no car to come up to the
favela, there is no telephone to call him, there is no beauty to see,
and the people die without wanting to die.)

*O menino está  morrendo!* The child is dying. Maria came running to
fetch us. We went. It was already dead, lying on a wide board alongside
the other sleeping children. Why didn\'t the mother go to the Santa Casa
clinic as I had urged her to? The child died of dehydration. Dysentery
and the heat deprive the body of so much liquid that it dries out. They
sit there crying and do nothing, call us when it is too late. Were the
poor in Germany ever so apathetic? Are apathy and thoughtlessness the
results of misery (which would disappear with better living conditions),
or are they characteristics of these people?

Está  morto!

You suddenly feel empty, helpless, stupid, knowing nothing. What can you
do? I snap off my flashlight, a definitive sound, like an exclamation
point behind the *morto*.

Here you are closer to life than would ever be possible in Europe.
Birth, death, marriage, sickness, crippling, idiocy \-- you\'re right in
the middle of it and not shut off by walls from all the vital, essential
human events as in Europe where sickness is hidden behind hospital
walls, madness within a sanitarium, birth behind maternity ward walls.

At a birthday party for a one-year-old Syrian boy I studied Londrina\'s
haute-volée. The party took place in the living room and on the balcony.
Suddenly I realized that I hadn\'t previously noticed the strict
separation of sexes. I speak with a man on the gentlemen\'s balcony -
for shame! The ladies sit stiffly in the living room like hens on a
perch wearing powder and mascara masks, praising the birthday child who
is plump and overfed, a little Farouk. With much effort they are able to
coax a smile from the fat dumpling face. The child isn\'t treated as a
human being but as a curiosity for the grown-ups to dance around.

The children of wealthy parents, spoiled and pampered, are in stark
contrast to those others who will not even be born because their
potential mothers are too weak and under-nourished.

During the night Dona Antonia sends for us. She has had a miscarriage.
The third in her twenty-five years. The long shadows the petroleum lamp
throws on the walls make everything seem even more wretched than it is.

*E dura a vida da casada.* A married woman\'s life is hard.
Nevertheless, the women of Brazil, rich or poor, black or white, yearn
for only one thing: to marry as soon as possible, despite their daily
experience that drudgery begins with marriage -- especially for the
poor, of course.

Their lives are determined by the great rhythms of life -- birth,
marriage, motherhood -- to which they are harnessed as though under a
compulsion they must obey. A compulsion which gives their lives a
certain structure, but no freedom to move outside this pre-ordained
course. Life exhausts itself in *namorar, casar, criar* (fall in love,
marry, bear and raise children).

I recently experienced a similar apathy and resignation in a dream. I
lay stretched out on the earth (red earth!) and was about to be burned.
I covered myself with paper so the fire would ignite more quickly. Adolf
and Kaspar stood to my left and right and watched, unmoving. I said
goodbye to them and lay down again with my arms stretched out wide and
my face towards the sky. No fear, no desire to be saved, resigned, as
though a will stronger than mine had decided.

While we are on the subject of dreams, here is another of my Brazilian
ones. I am on a jungle river, probably a tributary of the Amazon.
Hanging plants dip low to the shallow, turbid, lazily flowing water. I
know that dangerous Indians live nearby. Then a huge, wild-looking,
bearded man emerges from a cave. Quickly I hide among the hanging
plants. He disappears into the cave. Shortly thereafter a half-civilized
Indian emerges and just as quickly disappears. Then an Indian splendidly
dressed in brocade appears - he seems to shine - with a child in his
arms. He shows it to me and speaks calmly and peacefully to me. I think:
these are the three phases of human development - the caveman, the
normal, average man and the royal man, shining from within.

Londrina, September 28, 1965

We were invited to a children\'s party at the home of a black family.
Their hut always seemed somewhat mysterious after some children told us
that the Holy Ghost puts up there. Recently we heard, at night, loud
tom-toms, African jungle drums in their monotonous singsong. Curiosity
overcame my indolence and I went there. Through the window I saw women
dressed in long white gowns dancing in a semi-trance. In a monotonous
chant, gradually increasing in volume, they cried, Domini! Domini! It
was African Sarawa Cult, a mish-mash of Catholic belief and African
hedonist exorcism through which sickness is apparently cured (white
Sarawa) and spells are cast (black Sarawa).

Now to the children\'s party. I was prepared for a birthday party but
not for what awaited me there. As the daughter of the house led me into
the shack I heard a wild drumming and smelled a penetrating odor of
wine, incense and other indefinable things (mostly blood as I later
learned).

The first thing I discerned in the semi-darkness was a black woman
dressed all in red kneeling in the middle of the narrow crowded room.
She held a convulsively twitching chicken fast while a fat black woman
hung with pearls and chains (apparently the high priestess, she looked
weird with one eye half-closed and the other goggling fearfully) cut the
chicken\'s throat, caught the blood in a bowl, mixed it with oil, wine
and honey and drew a cross on the other woman\'s forehead and throat
with it. The one in red then drank the horrible brew and immediately
went into ecstatic convulsions, similar to those of the slaughtered
chicken, fell down, sprang into the air, danced wildly and finally threw
herself onto the floor and rolled her eyes. Then another went into the
circle, knelt, another chicken was sacrificed and so on, some fifteen
times in my presence.

The atmosphere was uncannily thick, somehow stimulating and oppressive
at the same time. It was like being in deepest Africa, although by no
means only blacks participated. At intervals the drums stopped beating,
the priestess rang a delicate bell and all was still. She said something
about Jesus Christ and Domini (I had the impression she felt duty-bound
to introduce a Christian element) and at once the singing, dancing and
twitching continued. All this in a tiny, dim, candle-lit room crammed
with sweating people and many children who delightedly clapped their
hands and sang along and who I drew around me as a protective wall.
Everyone was very attentive to me, held my bag, secured a good place for
me to see, fanned fresh (sic) air in my direction. I was invited for the
evening session and, being most curious, I didn\'t let the opportunity
pass.

The atmosphere was completely different: calm and solemn. The initiates,
the *filhas de santos*, also children, were dressed in blossom-white
gowns trimmed with lace. They formed a circle around a white tablecloth
spread on the floor. A child put candles and flowers on it, then six
plates. Bahia food was brought. Six children were allowed to eat of it,
representing all the children in the world, for the ceremony was an
exorcism of the spirits who can harm children. This part was most
solemn, only to be transformed suddenly into violent drumming and
dancing.

But I didn\'t have the impression that the people thus carried away \--
and it was real, not faked \-- were any happier for it. Their faces were
distorted with pain, sudden cramps shook their bodies, they put the
backs of their hands on their spines as though they had motors there
that called forth the ecstasy through cramps and writhing. The Sarawa
priestess told me afterwards that the descending spirit occupies the
lower vertebrae, literally possessing the person.

It was somehow nice when a nine year old child sprang into the circle,
danced delicately, jumped for joy into the air and took my hand and
placed it on an old woman\'s wrinkled face. She was the only one whose
facial expression was calm and happy.

Then I was called aside. I expected the worst. I was to try the Bahia
food. Manioca meal mixed with some green stuff and a mountain of meat
that threatened to stick in my throat: the chicken which I had seen
twitching several hours earlier. The thought of the flowing blood and
the memory of the penetrating odor so nauseated me that the physical
exertion of forcing it down brought tears to my eyes.

Londrina, 1 October

The stream of visitors has ceased. It is raining. The *terra-roxa* dust,
which normally covers the land, furniture and people like a cloud, has
been transformed into clay-like, slippery sludge. We are as good as cut
off from the outside world; no automobile dares to penetrate this mud.
It began last night with an electrical storm. This morning we viewed the
mess: water in the kitchen and living-room.

Yesterday evening we sat on the stairs with a record player. Right away
we were surrounded by a flock of children with whom we danced the *Hava
Naguila*, laughed and \"politicized\". On Sunday the governor will be
elected from two candidates. Even the children are ardent supporters of
one or the other. Suddenly a twelve-year-old boy stood on the fence and
gave a classical election speech. It was hilarious, especially when he
graciously acknowledged our enthusiastic applause. It is the age when
they never tire of asking such things as: Is there a *Castelo Branco
*(the president) in Germany too? Is there war in Germany now? Are there
blacks in Germany too? etc.

Londrina, October 9

When I look out the window I see a wedding tent. Cido\'s eldest sister
is getting married. It will be the favela wedding of the year. The bride
seems to belong to one of the best families. She even owns a
radio-phonograph, which stands as a show-piece on a podium in the tent.
On the porch are three rococo chairs. A special sign of wealth is that
she lives in a stone house. Her father is a piece-worker who carries
coffee sacks. The groom is an industrious electrician who lives in one
of the new wooden houses. They have been preparing the bride\'s house
for days now: painting, hammering, sawing, even the eternal lamp over
the front door has been polished. It is *the* event. Often more money is
spent on a wedding than the family\'s meager budget can stand. The girls
of the favela make themselves beautiful. Their hairdos are veritable
towers.

The wedding became a real festival, very gay for us but a torment for
the bride and groom who only danced once and otherwise could only let
themselves be admired by their relatives, many of whom had come from far
away. The day was sweltering like a greenhouse, so I could only pity the
bride in her tight fitting dress and long white gloves. We had never
been in such demand \-- by the children. A flock of them constantly hung
onto us: *Danca comigo *(dance with me.) Finally we organized a dance
line.

Since our paramedic once cured a boy\'s earache, more and more mothers
come to us with their sick children. The word spread like lightning that
there is a *medico* here. Most of the children have dysentery, probably
caused by the impure water, and parasites. Schistosomiasis, caused by a
parasite which spends the days in the intestines and nights in the liver
and penetrates the intestinal wall each time, leads to serious liver
damage. There is still no cure for Chagas disease, caused by the bite of
an insect. One dies a long drawn-out death. Now and then the government
launches a campaign against parasites, but as long as the greater part
of the population lives in houses without running water and toilets,
they are useless. The people are always infected anew. Bloated bellies,
lack of appetite, listlessness and apathy are the results. Many parts of
the favela are incubators of pestilence. City sewers empty into the
favela and the filth pours into a ditch and oozes alongside the water
spring. During Pablo Pimentel\'s election campaign the sewers were
lengthened by ten yards. Most likely the remaining pipes will have to
wait for the next election. The stench when the west wind blows is
bestial. The men wash themselves in the spring and the women do their
laundry there. They also wash the laundry of the wealthy. If they only
knew what kind of water is used!

This afternoon we watched a fight over twenty cruzeiros that a woman
underpaid the iceman. Cooking-pots, clumps of earth and finally knives
were used. The word *briga *(fight) brings everyone running like nothing
else. Jos‚ the fight addict, gave this one a miss though; It was only an
unworthy women\'s battle.

A letter from the Vila da Boa Esperanca (Town of Good Hope) Here is a
loose translation:

Senhorita Ruti, (me!)

By means of this poorly written letter I come to ask if, through
goodness and kindness, you could accept this little girl in the school.
She doesn\'t go to school, has no mother and lives with her sister. She
would like to learn embroidery. I can\'t come myself because I am about
to give birth. And if possible could you send milk for two children
until my husband is released from the hospital. He has been there a long
time. I am without work and ill. If you can do anything I thank you in
advance.

Londrina, October 12

Yesterday we delivered our first favela child. All day it was unbearably
hot until a thunderstorm finally broke in the evening. We were outside
enjoying the patter of raindrops when the excited father came running
up. Armed with a midwife kit, a bottle of alcohol, rubber gloves, towels
and a flashlight, we tramped hurriedly through the mud, equally excited.
The room was very dark, the bed full of lumps, rain dripped through the
roof, you could hardly hear your own words over the thunder. We didn\'t
know how to say \"push\" in Brazilian, the dictionary apparently being
incompetent in such cases. We therefore kept calling for *mais forca*,
(more force) and finally the baby came. We were deliriously happy when
it began to scream. The afterbirth was carefully laid aside and
afterwards the mother buried it, for the child\'s protection.

A delivery in the Santa Casa, a Catholic hospital, costs about seven
dollars, half a month\'s wages for a housemaid. So they go there only in
emergencies and otherwise trust in the help of an experienced mother.

Continued in the next issue of SCR

[Chapter 1](https://southerncrossreview.org/148/favela-children-1.html)

This book is [available for purchase at Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Favela-Children-Brazilian-Ute-Craemer/dp/194830242X) in paperback and kindle.

Translated from the German by Frank Thomas Smith.
