
# The Other Me

![Cafe Sperl - Vienna](cafe-sperl.jpg){class="alarge"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

Vienna: it was my last meeting before mandatory retirement,
something I myself had mandated. I had noticed that old people
never want to let go; my father and his father were like that. My
grandfather was still haunting the Board meetings at ninety. My
father merely held onto the company's reins until 75, when I took
over. Although I knew that I would also some day reach the age of
mandatory retirement, I mandated it anyway; 65 seems as remote to
thirty-year-olds as thirty does to teenagers.

General Meetings are still always held in romantic foreign places.
Considering that our head office and main manufacturing units are
in Milwaukee, almost anywhere fits the description. This has the
dual advantage of keeping everyone in a good mood and limiting the
number of stockholders attending. I arrived a day early, wishing
to renew my acquaintance with Vienna, a city very rich in history
and beauty and blood and which never changes, at least outwardly.

A block of rooms had been reserved at the Intercontinental, where
the meeting was to be held. It has excellent facilities for large
company meetings. I, however, booked a room for myself at the
Imperial Hotel. It has not changed since the nineteenth century –
at least outwardly. Everything is as it always has been, except
for the plumbing, and even that is kept highly polished. My
younger colleagues, who little knew what they were missing, smiled
at my eccentricity. But I didn't care. There was to be a
“surprise” dinner party in my honor in the Intercontinental after
the meeting, at which I would give a maudlin speech and leave
early so the others wouldn't be frustrated by my avuncular
presence.

On the afternoon of my arrival, I strolled down the Kärntner Ring
to the OpernGasse, then back to Kärntner-Strasse. It was autumn
and a chill was in the air. I looked through the window of the
Café Sperl, where decades ago Anne-Marie and I had spent many a
pleasant post-theater or opera hour with a bottle of clear white
Austrian wine, before repairing to the Imperial for what any
healthy young couple would do in such sumptuous old-world
circumstances. The catch was – isn't there always one? – that
Anne-Marie was descended from minor Austrian nobility and she was,
or would someday be, rich. I was neither rich – although I later
became so – nor would I ever be nobility or even Austrian. In fact
I was a mere sergeant in the U.S. Army, lucky enough to be
stationed in Vienna during the Cold War. I eventually went home
and Anne-Marie married some filthy rich Austrian nobleman.

The café looked as it always had, outwardly *and* inwardly. The
marble-topped tables, comfortable wooden chairs, newspapers
hanging from racks to be read free of charge, wonderful coffee
from Brazil or Colombia, but prepared a la Viennese, and sweet
cakes. I entered, walked through cigar smoke (smoking still
permitted, even encouraged) towards the rear and “my” corner
table.

It was occupied by someone who, to me, was very strange – so
strange in fact that I froze in my tracks and, I fear, gawked at
him. He was me (or I was he) forty years ago. Do I remember what I
looked like forty years ago? Of course, I have photographs –
taken, in fact, now that I mention it, by Anne-Marie. He was
totally me, at least outwardly. Should I approach and ask him if
or why he is me, or turn and run. I was slowly approaching him
without realizing it until I was alongside his table. He looked up
from reading his newspaper, the *Wiener Zeitung*, and glanced at
me quizzically. “Excuse me,” I said, “but I...” He nodded,
indicated one of the empty chairs with his hand and went back to
reading. He understood me to want to ask if one of the other
chairs at his table (there were two unoccupied ones) was free. In
Austria one has the *right* to sit at any table with an unoccupied
chair; it is, however, considered good manners to ask if the chair
in question is free.

I sat down and the waiter appeared almost instantly and wiped my
part of the already spotless table with his cloth. My erstwhile
Doppelgänger, seeing that I paid no attention to the waiter, said
to me in slightly accented English, with a smile “He wants your
order, sir.” Of course, I had spoken to him in English. And why
not, since he was me, although I do speak German. “Oh, I see, just
coffee,” I said to the waiter in English. He nodded as though to a
simpleton and vanished.

I decided to come directly to the point, something I often do and
has contributed much to my success in business and, alas, the
failures in my personal life - or perhaps it's the other way
round. “Have you noticed, young man, the similarity in our
appearances.” I could have said that we look alike, but such
direct speech, even from me, is not appropriate in Vienna. He
seemed surprised as he looked me over. I was dressed in what for
me is informal attire – gray slacks and a sports jacket,
light-blue speckled tie, loafers. He was in jeans with a hole in
one knee, a pink sweater (no discernible shirt), running shoes and
white socks. Of course nowadays any CEO might dress that way, so
there was no way of telling his social status. His hair, by the
way, was so long it touched his shoulders, but at least it was
clean. I had little hair left to boast about. He weighed at least
thirty pounds less than me.

“Why yes, there is a resemblance,” he admitted, concentrating on
my face. “You look like my father.”

I leaned closer to him. “But you see, it's more than that. I have
photos, I could show you that when I was your age...24?...25?” He
nodded. “...I looked exactly like you. It's uncanny."

“Is that so?” he said, humoring me, I felt. “Coincidences are
often most interesting.”

I shook my head. “No, I think it's more than mere coincidence.”

“Do you? Why?”

“What I mean to say is what if you really are me...as I was then?
I mean...”

“Daniel,” a young woman who had suddenly materialized at our table
said in German, “we must hurry. The train is at 10.30 and if we
miss it there's not another one until tomorrow.”

I stood up, as a gentleman should: she was Anne-Marie, exactly as
I remembered her face, her figure, her graceful body langauge. Her
clothes were very different though: plaid mini-skirt, black blouse
barely covering braless breasts. I couldn't take my eyes off her.
The young man also stood, not for the presence of a lady, but
because she was insisting on him leaving with her in order to
catch a train. She glanced at me curiously. The young man, Me,
Daniel, not realizing that I understood, said in German, “This guy
thinks we look so much alike that he's me.” He laughed. “Or I'm
him.” He bowed slightly to me and said, “Auf wiedersehen.” To her
he said, “I'll get a taxi,” and hurried out.  
  
Anne-Marie just stood there looking at me. She was only an inch or
two shorter. She held her hand out. I bent over and kissed it.
“Come on, Annie, the taxi's waiting,” Daniel said from the
entrance. When she didn't move, he said, “What's the matter?”  
  
“Well, if that's what you look like when you're an old fart it's
not so bad,” she said, smiling at me. It was impossible to know
whether she was speaking about me or to me. She shook her head and
passed her hand - the one I'd kissed - over her eyes as though
wiping away cobwebs. Then she turned and joined Daniel, Me, at the
exit and the taxi and the train to...I've often wondered where
to..

I never saw them again. Oh, I was fascinated by those events, but
I decided that if I tried to follow them up, to investigate the
possibility that one or more individuals can live more than one
earthly life simultaneously, that is, reincarnate before dying, I
might go mad. At the very least everyone else would think me mad.
I did consider the alternative of a parallel universe, but that
was even weirder, so I dropped it...outwardly at least.
