

# Joy at Christmas 

![Madonna Terranuova by Raphael](madonna-terranuova.jpg){class="alarge"}

## By Kristina Kaine

After allowing hope and peace to live in our hearts over the last two
weeks, we now come to joy. *Chara* is the Greek word for joy.

In chapter 15 of St John's Gospel are the words, "*that my joy may be in
you, and that your joy may be full."* The sign of love is joy, *chara*.
This is not frivolous happiness; *chara* is related to *charis* which
means grace, graciousness and gratitude. It is a quiet feeling that
swells our heart and fills our whole being with light. We feel humbly
confident, strong but not overpowering, and certainly filled with
gratitude.

Joy is a deed, an accomplishment that we cannot really explain, we can
only experience it. We experience joy when we connect with higher
things. Like when we catch a glimpse of the purpose of a child born in
the Middle East two thousand years ago changing the world forever, joy
rises in our hearts like a morning mist allowing the first rays of the
sun to shine through.

Then, if we are able to follow the development of this child, born into
a tribe, as it felt the imprint of individuality in its soul, joy rises
within us. This joy is not only the result of our ability to see what
took place but also to recognize the freedom made available to every
single human being.

Joy awakens in us a sense of independence while at the same time giving
us the ability to make creative choices. An innate respect awakens
within us for every human being who, like us, has the power to make
choices. When we see this we also see our relationship to the Gods who
make choices to create and maintain this Universe. Accompanying this joy
is the deep sense of responsibility we have for each other and for this
world.

Joy is not something we express; it is a quiet inner activity that
shines from us to the extent that we can achieve it. We don't need to
tell anyone we are experiencing this joy, they know, and they set about
trying to have the experience themselves.

When Rudolf Steiner was asked why there is so little happiness in life
when everyone just wants to be happy, he replied, "*Well, maybe being
happy is not our reason for being alive."* He added that we are alive to
accomplish a particular task. We know we are accomplishing our
particular tasks when we hear the whispers of joy filling our hearts.

From Katarina Kaine\'s [Secrets of the Christian Festivals](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B08D6CPL8D) available on Amazon.
