# Letters to the Editor

![](goya-letters.jpg){class="a"}

RE: [Anthroposophia Today](https://southerncrossreview.org/149/meeting-anthroposophia-today.html)

This is a wonderfully inspiring and enlightening interview!

McDermott challenges us, indeed, urges us, to take Steiner's insights,
not as dogma, but as springboards into new realities which are emerging
in our time.

His comments on the unique paradox of the American experiment in
multiculturalism are especially timely and compelling.

Steiner's teachings passed down to us were by necessity limited by the
strictures of the German language of the early 20th century.

Our task, McDermott says, is to take up the impulses behind those
teachings, and bring them to bear on the plurality of spiritual
traditions which are now coming to the fore in contemporary
consciousness, a kind of post-Orientalism, as Edward Said might have it.
(from Emerging World)

RE: [Breathe](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html)

So beautiful, so perfect - thank you for putting my feelings into words

Courtney Chapman

RE: [Intrusion](https://southerncrossreview.org/149/beck-intrusion.html) 

Dear Frank,

this was quite a story. Everyone to their beliefs, right? Sharina
believed that the best funeral for her grandma was putting her corpse
into a stone mausoleum. She made it happen, it was quite a feet. She
honoured her grandma, because she believed this is the best way to
express her respect and gratitude towards her. My only remark is that it
was strange to read it in an anthroposohical review :) In the story,
Sharina was offered the option of free cremation of her grandma. That
would have been the easiest, and most spiritual solution\... But that is
just my boring anthroposophist self speaking :)

Cheers,

Norbert Hanny

[Judith von Halle interview](https://southerncrossreview.org/112/jvh-interview.html)

I was happy to find this interview that allowed Judith von Halle such
freedom and openness to explain her life and work, and a small window
into what stands behind all of this. Of course many things in life 
changed rapidly during the years since the interview, and others seem to
remain thee same.  But what is the same hides the banality of evil, and
I think this writer has lived and *done her work well!*

 Felice UK

[The Other Me](https://southerncrossreview.org/149/fts-other-me.html) 

Dear Frank,

Great story. Thanks for sharing. Vienna is very close to my Hungarian
hometown (I was brought up in
[Sopron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sopron)), only 75 km away. So we
were very close physically during the cold war :)

Cheers, Norbert Hanny

Nice story here, Mr. Smith.

You were able to bring forth a strong feeling of Vienna (though I\'ve
never been there), and simultaneously create this otherworldly auru here
in the present moment\--

Martin Kemple

RE: [Renascence](https://southerncrossreview.org/149/edna-renascence.html)

RE: Renascence

Good morning, Frank:

Thanks for sending this through! Millay is one of the greats. I first
encountered her in high school when I had to write a paper on her. It\'s
sad that her critical reputation has take a hit in recent decades. Her
best work (like this) is truly for the ages.

Take care!

-Mike Winter
