![](magic-mound-3.jpg){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter Three

Mara finds the boys and takes them to the palace at Maxanatura

When Sergio woke up it was cool and the leaves on the trees and bushes
hung heavy with dew. A fine mist covered the earth below the mound and
birds were chirping and insects buzzing. The sun wasn\'t visible but the
sky was orange behind him. He thought this strange because the sun had
been near to setting in front of him when he had closed his eyes.

\"Divino!\" He nudged his brother, who grunted. \"Do you remember which
side the sun was on when we fell asleep?\" But Divino didn\'t remember.

\"*You are right, little man, it was on the other side, in the west,
where it always is when it sets*.\"

Suddenly Divino was wide awake. \"Who said that?\"

Sergio jumped to his feet and looked around.

\"I\'m down here,\" the same voice said.

They went to the side of the mound and looked down at a girl standing up
to her waist in the mist. Her black hair was tightly curled around her
head in a perfect sphere. She smiled up at them and her brilliant white
teeth made her dark skin look radiant. As they watched, the mist slowly
sank to the ground leaving wisps clinging to her robe. At first Divino
thought she was rising, but realized that couldn\'t be because she
didn\'t get any higher. Her robe was green, or appeared to be at first,
but as she moved it changed color, now light-blue, then yellowish red,
then pink. Its color seemed to depend upon how much light or shadow fell
on it. She was slim and pretty and almost as tall as Sergio.

\"Don\'t you want to know who I am?\" she said, breaking the silence.

\"Who are you?\" Divino asked.

\"I am Mara, daughter of Mamara, which means queen.\"

\"Oh,\" Divino said. \"Does Mara mean queen or Mamara?\"

\"Mamara, of course.\"

\"Then you must be a princess,\" Sergio said, obviously impressed.

\"Yes,\" Mara answered as she climbed up the mound, \"a princess who
will never be queen.\" She was still smiling, so if she would never be
queen it didn\'t seem to bother her.

\"Why not?\" Divino asked.

\"My, you ask a lot of questions.\" She put her hand on his head and
pulled his hair playfully, which Divino didn\'t much like. \"What is
your name?\"

\"Divino.\"

\"Divin-o\" she repeated. \"That\'s a beautiful name. \"It means you
have something to do with God. \"And your name?\" she asked Sergio. When
he told her she frowned. \"What does it mean?\"

\"I don\'t know, it\'s just a name.\" He was a little annoyed because
she obviously liked Divino\'s name more than his.

\"All names mean something,\" Mara said. \"How strange that you don\'t
know what your own name means.\"

\"Why is the sun there when it was on the other side when we fell
asleep?\" Sergio asked, wishing to change the subject, but also because
he couldn\'t believe that they had slept the whole night through.

\"Because it can\'t be here when it\'s there,\" she said, pointing first
to the east then to the west. Besides, you\'re in Maxa now, not
Brazil.\"

\"Maxa?\"

\"Yes. Now we will go to Maxanatara, where I live.\"

\"We can\'t do that,\" Sergio said, \"we have to return to our vacation
house.\"

\"Dona Ute will be worried about us,\" Divino added.

\"You don\'t understand,\" Mara insisted. \"You are not in Brazil now,
so you can\'t go back to your vacation house.\"

\"But how did we get to Maxa?\" Sergio asked, thoroughly confused.

\"On the mound, of course. Before you were in Brazil, now you are in
Maxa. It\'s very simple really.\"

\"On the mound?\" Sergio repeated.

\"It must be a magic mound,\" Divino said excitedly.

\"Of course. Come along now, it\'s a long walk to the palace.\" Mara
took hold of Sergio\'s right hand and Divino\'s left hand and led them
down the mound. She did not hold them very tightly, but they felt a
strange strength in her hands which left them no choice but to follow
her. They walked three abreast through the forest on a wide path. Sergio
didn\'t like being held and he asked her to let them loose, but Mara
said they might run away and then Mamara would be angry with her.

They walked a long way, but it didn\'t tire them. The air wasn\'t humid
as in Brazil. It was clear and fresh as though they were high up on a
mountain. They knew they couldn\'t be on a mountain though, because the
ground was level. They heard and saw many animals and birds which
weren\'t completely different from the birds and animals of Brazil, but
sufficiently different to have surprised certain people such as
ornithologists, zoologists and other experts.

These animals were not at all afraid of Mara and the boys. The peeked
out from the underbrush alongside the path and scurried about and
squealed and squeaked or twittered and peeped at them. Mara answered
them with the same sounds. She had long since let go of the boys\' hands
because the path had become too narrow for them to go on three abreast.
They were so fascinated that they didn\'t even think of running away.

\"Can you talk to the animals?\" Divino asked Mara.

\"Naturally.\" She turned to face them and continued walking backwards
without missing a step. \"They don\'t really say much, they only express
their moods and curiosity.

\"Are they curious about us?\" Divino asked curiously.

\"Oh yes.\"

\"Why?\"

Mara laughed and faced forward again. She spoke to them over her
shoulder. \"Don\'t you know?\"

\"No,\" Divino said truthfully.

\"Well, one reason is that you don\'t smell like us. Animals can smell
better than they can see.\"

\"Do you smell better than us?\"

Mara laughed again. She was still enjoying Divino\'s questions. I don\'t
think we can smell better than you. I know that Mireya can smell as well
as I can.\"

\"Who\'s Mireya?\" Sergio asked as he jumped effortlessly over a
monkey-like animal sitting in the middle of the path. Divino walked
around it.

After a long pause Mara said, \"Mother will tell you about her.\"

\"Will we see her?\" Sergio felt a keen interest in Mireya, although he
had only heard her name.

\"Don\'t ask me about her. I wasn\'t supposed to mention her to you,\"
Mara answered curtly.

Sergio wanted to ask why she wasn\'t supposed to mention her, but he
knew this would mean Mara would have to mention her again, which she
wasn\'t supposed to do. Divino had no such inhibitions.

\"Why aren\'t you supposed to mention her?\" he asked.

Mara didn\'t answer, nor did she speak again for a long time, until
Divino said, \"Why didn\'t you put the palace closer to the magic
mound?\"

Mara sighed. \"What difference does it make?\"

Divino was about to explain that then they wouldn\'t have so far to
walk, but his brother shushed him.

Finally the path curved sharply to the right and from that point on the
trees on both sides bent over towards the middle as though bowing. After
a while they saw the palace in the distance before them.

\"Is that a palace?\" Divino asked.

\"Yes, it\'s where we live,\" Mara said.

\"I thought palaces were much bigger.\"

\"You\'ll see how big it is when we get there.\"

Indeed, with every step they took the palace seemed to grow larger
until, when they arrived, it loomed over them in all its majesty.
Divino\'s eyes were wide open like brown saucers.

\"Are there palaces in Brazil, Sergio?\"

\"No,\" Sergio answered, \"only in fairy tales.\"

Continued in the next issue of SouthernCrossReview (or sooner).

[Chapter Two](https://southerncrossreview.org/147/magic-mound-1.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle: [The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)

and in Spanish at: [La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)
