# As Falls Russia, So Falls the World

![](russia-nk.jpg){class="a"}

### Exceptionalism Goes Global

## By [John Feffer](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/johnfeffer/)

Here's a nightmare scenario: Unable to recruit enough soldiers from the
Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin takes North Korean leader Kim Jong-un
up on [his recent
offer](https://www.businessinsider.com/north-korea-offering-russia-100k-troops-help-beat-ukraine-reports-2022-8)
to send 100,000 North Koreans to join the Russian president's ill-fated
attempt to seize Ukraine. Kim [has also
promised](https://www.dailynk.com/english/north-korea-selected-workers-dispatched-eastern-ukraine/)
to send North Korean workers to help rebuild that country's Donbas
region, parts of which Russian forces have destroyed in order to "save"
it. Consider this an eerie echo of the fraternal aid that Eastern
European Communist states provided Pyongyang in the 1950s after the
devastation of the Korean War.

The current love connection between Russia and North Korea is anything
but unprecedented. The Kremlin has provided a succession of Kims with
military and economic support. If Putin were ultimately to rely on so
many North Korean soldiers and laborers, however, it would mark the
first time that country had returned the favor in any significant way.
As a down payment on the new relationship, Pyongyang is already
reportedly assisting Moscow's war effort [with
shipments](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/09/06/north-korea-russia-weapons-ukraine/)
of Soviet-era rockets and ammunition.

[]{#anchor}An even tighter alliance between Moscow and Pyongyang, now
just one goose step from reality, suggests the possibility of a future
Eurasian Union of autocracies, including China and several Central Asian
states. Just a few years ago, an anti-Western alliance making up [nearly
20%](https://www.worldometers.info/geography/largest-countries-in-the-world/)
of the world's landmass and roughly the same percentage of its
population would have seemed unlikely indeed. For all its autocratic
tendencies, Russia was still pretending to be a democracy then and,
together with China, maintaining reasonable economic relations with the
West. North Korea, on the other hand, was an isolated outsider,
suffering under a hereditary dictatorship and tight sanctions that
restricted its access to the global economy.

Now, instead of North Korea adopting the political and economic norms of
the international community, it's surging to the front of the illiberal
pack as Kim waves his tour-guide flag to encourage others to walk his
way. Putin, for one, seems ready to enthusiastically follow his lead.
Over the last decade, after all, he's taken steps to eliminate Russian
civil society, while creating a top-down, corporatist economy. After
ordering the invasion of Ukraine in February, the Russian leader now
faces [the same kind of sanctions
regime](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-03-07/russia-surges-past-iran-to-become-world-s-most-sanctioned-nation)
that plagues Pyongyang, forcing his country to pursue its own version of
*juche*, North Korea's philosophy of self-reliance. Both nations have
largely replaced their governing ideologies of the 1990s --- communism
in North Korea, democracy in Russia --- with an ugly, xenophobic
nationalism.

At a more fundamental level, North Korea and Russia are both exemplars
of exceptionalism. From its founding after World War II, North Korea has
generally considered itself an exception to any rules governing
international conduct. Russia's invasion of Ukraine, meanwhile, has
cemented in place Putin's version of a new Russian exceptionalism, meant
to bury once and for all the efforts of Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris
Yeltsin to bring the Soviet Union and its successor states into greater
compliance with global norms.

Nor are Russia and North Korea exceptional in their exceptionalism.
Thumbing a nose at international authorities has become an integral part
of a growing authoritarian populism, which has [manifested
itself](https://tomdispatch.com/john-feffer-donald-trump-and-america-b/)
as anger at economic globalization and disenchantment with the liberal
democratic elites who have supported that project. Although the assault
on liberalism and the embrace of illiberal exceptionalism have taken an
acutely violent form in the war in Ukraine, they can be found in less
virulent but no less troubling forms in Europe (Hungary), Asia
(Myanmar), Africa (Ethiopia), and Latin America (Brazil).

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Ground zero for modern-day exceptionalism, however, has always been the
United States, where a longstanding bipartisan consensus holds that
America has the right to do almost anything it wants to maintain its
global hegemony. Of course, exceptionalism here is also on a spectrum,
with liberal internationalists like Joe Biden at one end and Donald
Trump, a Russian-style autocrat in the making, at the other. Put
differently, there's a growing struggle here over the degree to which
this country should play well with others.

What's taking place in Ukraine --- an exceptionalist power trying to
crush a liberal internationalist system --- is a version of that very
same power struggle. Indeed, the ongoing bloodbath there anticipates the
kind of carnage that could ensue in this country if Donald Trump or some
politician like him were to take the White House in 2024.

**The End of Accession?**

Nationalists hate globalization because they believe that international
bodies should not be writing the rules that constrain the conduct of
their governments.

In Brazil, Trump-style President Jair Bolsonaro has [lashed
out](https://apnews.com/article/virus-outbreak-brazil-environment-south-america-forests-a6c347c672595611a9ce6004b59a1f79)
at U.N. agencies and transnational environmental organizations for their
criticism of his laissez-faire approach to the destruction of the Amazon
rainforest. Euroskeptics like Hungary's Viktor Orban and the United
Kingdom's Brexiteers
[dislike](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/02/support-for-eurosceptic-parties-doubles-two-decades-across-eu)
having to abide by regulations from European Union (EU) headquarters in
Brussels covering everything from the size of cucumbers to the freedom
of the press. Trump famously pulled the United States out of every
international accord that came within swinging distance of [his MAGA
machete](https://www.justsecurity.org/72656/reengaging-on-treaties-and-other-international-agreements-part-i-president-donald-trumps-rejection-of-international-law/),
including the Paris climate agreement, the Iran nuclear deal, and the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.

Ukraine has moved in the opposite direction. After the 2014 Euromaidan
protests sent its pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, packing, the
more-or-less liberal governments that followed certainly didn't shy away
from appealing to Ukrainian nationalism. Still, they were also willing,
even eager, to submit to the rules and regulations of external powers,
at least those further to the west. The Ukrainian political struggles of
2013-2014, after all, centered around a desire to join the EU, support
for which has recently topped
[90%](https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/record-number-ukrainians-support-joining-eu-backing-nato-membership-falls-poll-2022-04-05/).

Putin has, of course, held out a very different kind of membership to
Ukraine --- in a Slavic brotherhood. Whatever the pluses or minuses of
any future tight partnership with Russia and neighboring Belarus, it
would flow from compliance with the parochial dictates of the Kremlin.
In other words, Ukraine has faced an all-too-stark choice: become an
unwilling partner of Russian exceptionalism or willingly accede to the
rules of the West. Given such options, it's hardly surprising that
Euroskepticism barely registers there.

Nor, of course, is Ukraine the only country eager to knock on the EU's
door. Several others are already in the queue, undoubtedly including ---
[if it votes to
separate](https://www.snp.org/europe-is-leaving-a-light-on-for-scotland/)
from the United Kingdom and its Brexiteers --- Scotland. For Europe, in
response to the challenges of economic globalization, including
pressures to privatize and a potential race to the bottom when it comes
to environmental and labor regulations, the response has been to
establish a transnational system that preserves at least some
social-democratic features. And that seems like an attractive compromise
to a number of countries huddling outside the EU's door, exposed to the
harsh winds of free trade and onerous debt.

But Brexit has hardly been the only challenge to the power and breadth
of the European Union. A refusal to abide by the democratically
determined policies of Brussels has united right-wing populists in
Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic, even as it's generated [a
strong current of
Euroskepticism](https://www.euractiv.com/section/politics/short_news/romania-sees-increase-in-euroscepticism/)
in countries like Romania. Support for the far right --- as well as the
Euroskeptical left --- remains strong in France, [particularly among the
young](https://www.politico.eu/article/france-presidential-election-2022-emmanuel-macron-marine-le-pen-young-euroskeptics/).
A coalition of far-right parties historically allergic to European
federalism is
[poised](https://www.france24.com/en/europe/20220826-italy-s-far-right-meloni-launches-campaign-riding-high-in-the-polls)
to take over the governance of Italy after elections later this month.
In fact, the EU faces a threat even greater than its possible
fragmentation: a hostile takeover by right-wing forces determined to
destroy the system from within.

Such authoritarian nationalism is on the rise elsewhere as well.
According to the
[metrics](https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2022/global-expansion-authoritarian-rule)
of the largely government-funded research institute Freedom House, only
20% of the world's population now lives in "free" countries. (In 2005,
it was 46%.) And of that 20%, many are in countries where authoritarian
nationalists --- Trump in the United States, Marine Le Pen in France,
Benjamin Netanyahu in Israel --- have a plausible chance of taking or
retaking power in the near future.

What a far cry from the 1990s when much of the former Soviet sphere
scrambled to join the EU after the Warsaw Pact dissolved. In that
decade, too, even China lobbied hard to join the World Trade
Organization, finally gaining Washington's support in 1999. It was such
a golden age of United Nations conferences and international agreements
--- from the U.N. Conference on Environment and Development to the Rome
statute establishing the International Criminal Court --- that the name
the U.N. [chose](https://www.un.org/law/1990-1999/) for the 1990s, the
Decade of International Law, seemed extraordinarily apt. Unfortunately,
today it seems more like ancient history.

Of course, the need for international cooperation has hardly
disappeared. Think climate change, pandemics, and the loss of
biodiversity, to mention just three urgent crises. But any enthusiasm
for creating binding international commitments has dwindled to the
vanishing point. The 2015 Paris climate accord was voluntary.
Transnational cooperation during the Covid pandemic, beyond scientific
circles, was minimal and often undermined by [export
restrictions](https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11551) on
critical medical supplies. Nuclear arms control agreements remain at a
standstill, while
the"[modernization](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7)"
of such arsenals continues apace and military budgets
[rise](https://www.sipri.org/publications/2022/sipri-fact-sheets/trends-world-military-expenditure-2021)
as the weapons trade [hits new
highs](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/12/6/weapons-trade-booms-as-profit-hits-record-531bn).

The 2020s are shaping up to be the Decade of the International Scofflaw.
Ukraine's tragedy lies not just in its geography, so near to Russia and
[so far from
God](https://rockinst.org/blog/so-far-from-god-and-so-close-to-the-united-states/),
but in its timing. Three decades ago, after the Soviet Union imploded,
Ukraine's desire to accede to international norms was unremarkable and
its willingness to relinquish its nuclear weapons universally applauded.
The worst response an EU application could have engendered back then was
a cold shoulder from Brussels. Today, the desire to join Europe has led
to war.

**Whither Autocracy**

Autocrats often hide behind sovereignty. China
[argues](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-un-rights-china/china-tells-u-n-rights-chief-to-respect-its-sovereignty-after-xinjiang-comments-idUSKCN1LR0L0)
that what's happening to its Uyghur minority in Xinjiang province is
simply none of the international community's business. North Korea
[insists](https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/nkorea-spent-much-642-million-nukes-2021-report-estimates-2022-06-15/)
that it has the sovereign right to develop nuclear weapons. And, of
course, in the U.S., Donald Trump's MAGA crew stoutly rejects snooty
foreigners passing judgment on the American attachment to fossil fuels,
border walls, and guns of all sizes.

Sovereignty was once the king's prerogative; he was, after all, the
sovereign. Today's autocrats, like Vladimir Putin, are more likely to
have been voted into office than born into the position like Kim
Jong-un. The elections that elevate such autocrats might be questionable
(and are likely to become ever more so during their reign), but popular
support is an important feature of the new authoritarianism. Putin is
currently backed by [around 80%](https://www.levada.ru/en/ratings/) of
Russians; Orban's approval rating in Hungary [hovers near
60%](https://www.statista.com/statistics/1191282/hungary-satisfaction-with-viktor-orban/);
and while Donald Trump could likely win again only thanks to voter
suppression and increasingly antidemocratic features [baked
into](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2022/08/22/american-democracy-was-never-designed-to-be-democratic-eric-holder-our-unfinished-march-nick-seabrook-one-person-one-vote-jacob-grumbach-laboratories-against-democracy)
the American political system, millions of Americans did put Trump in
the White House in 2016 and [continue to genuinely
believe](https://thehill.com/homenews/3610598-number-of-republicans-who-say-they-support-trump-over-gop-rise-poll/)
that he's their savior. Bolsonaro in Brazil, Nayib Bukele in El
Salvador, Narendra Modi in India, Kais Saied in Tunisia: they were all
elected.

Yes, such leaders are nationalists who often act like populists in
promising all sorts of handouts and feel-good nostrums to their
supporters. But what makes today's autocrats particularly dangerous is
their exceptionalism, their commitment to the kind of sovereignty that
existed before the creation of the United Nations, the earlier League of
Nations, or even the Treaty of Westphalia that established the modern
interstate system in Europe in 1648. Both Trump and Xi Jinping harken
back to a Golden Age all right --- of rulers who counted on the
unquestioned loyalty of their subjects and exercised a dominion
unchallenged except by other monarchs.

Sovereignty is the ultimate trump --- sorry for that! --- card. It can
be used to end every argument: *I'm the king of this castle and my word
is law inside its walls*. Autocrats tend not to be team players, but
increasingly democracies are playing the sovereignty card as well. Even
Russia, in so obviously violating Ukrainian sovereignty, has done that
by arguing that Ukraine had always been part of Russia.

The war in Ukraine boils down to a conflict between two conceptions of
world order. The first is defined by a one-against-all exceptionalism,
the second by an all-for-one transnational cooperation. Unfortunately,
the latter has become associated with economic globalization (which is
really about ruthless competition, not global cooperation), Davos-style
political elitism (which is usually more focused on collusion than
transparent collaboration), and trans-border migration (which results
from wars, the miseries of global economic inequality, and the ever more
devastating nightmare of climate change). Anger at these three elements
of "globalism" pushes voters to support "the other side," most commonly
an authoritarian exceptionalism rather than an authentic
internationalism.

The dismal endpoint of such political devolution could be a Russia with
North Korean characteristics: isolated, belligerent, and tyrannical.
Today, countries that take such a path risk the outlaw status North
Korea has enjoyed for 75 years. The question is: What happens if, in
some future moment, the outlaws constitute the majority?

What's truly frightening, however, is that this larger geopolitical
conflict is a two-front war. Even as the West unites against the Russia
that Putin built, it finds itself fighting homegrown variants of
authoritarian exceptionalism, from Trump to Orban. Think of this as the
geopolitical version of that commonplace horror-film twist: the phone
call from the serial killer that turns out to be coming from *within the
house*.

Can the heroine of this story, true internationalism, survive the
onslaught of lawless maniacs bent on reviving a world of unaccountable
sovereigns and promoting a war of all against all? We can only hope that
our heroine not only survives these harrowing challenges but goes on to
star in less horrifying and more edifying sequels.

Copyright 2022 John Feffer

Featured image: [Vladimir
Putin](https://flickr.com/photos/antoniomarinsegovia/51841675270/in/photolist-2mZ58Vq-2njT17F-2n5BUrp-2kvno4i-kAikdT-2auycjW-2nhpLDW-QVhZbj-2naddD7-ScrAaW-2iGFscJ-2n8CaLv-2n5sJMn-29ZMQoN-pEfqVM-NXzTeh-LHCEUX-29ZMNHd-8jbtJa-2b1WkxC-QcYE3d-2bSwGmn-2nc45oi-QnHCH3-2dg4eqH-2b1WkS5-2neeMkG-2niRy7x-2n5Hj6u-nScssq-2n7e73n-2neBxmc-2njFVnt-2a7wz1Z-2n5HKUg-ALiS7D-2npM3gS-2nbmvft-2n6UBXo-5hGC9-y2XJ4-2n6iSXJ-mMVTGq-2n5M11A-oEXXNa-icjkVP-fwCaqF-2mPkqGq-fuobsg-M1wRi)
by [Antonio Marín
Segovia](https://flickr.com/photos/antoniomarinsegovia/) is licensed
under [CC BY-NC-ND
2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/) / Flickr

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [John Feffer](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/johnfeffer/)

**John Feffer**,
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/the-five-plagues-testing-humanity/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/the-five-plagues-testing-humanity/),
is the author of the dystopian novel
[*Splinterlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467244/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and* *the
director of Foreign Policy In Focus at the Institute for Policy
Studies.* [*Frostlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
a Dispatch Books original, is volume two of his *Splinterlands* series,
and the final novel in the trilogy is
[*Songlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
He has also written [*Right Across the World: The Global Networking of
the Far-Right and the Left
Response*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0745341896/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)
