# Mikhail Gorbachev

![](gorby.jpg){class="a"}

## Interview with Gerhard Hafner

#### Interviewed by ****Wolfgang Held****


**W.H. What did you think when you heard about the death of Mikhail
Gorbachev?**

G.H. The profound tragedy of his life! Mikhail Gorbachev is, in my eyes,
one of the greatest, perhaps the greatest politicians of the 20th
century. He achieved unbelievable things -- and reaped in his region of
the world above all thanklessness and incomprehension. At the end of his
life, he was shamefully lonely, disregarded, and even outright hated by
the majority of his compatriots. Associated with this is a second
tragedy that I find even greater. It is related to the question of what
has become of his grandiose impulse today. Certainly, indirectly, in
some cases unintentionally, Gorbachev's mission had planetary
dimensions. But it was first addressed to his country and his fellow
human beings. He wanted to free them from the tribulation of an
anti-human, totalitarian society. Gorbachev's goal was to democratize
the Soviet Union and Russia, to open them up to intellectual freedom and
plurality as well as to a free and, at the same time, social economy, to
rebuild the totalitarian, static system into an order that was
self-determined, capable of development by the people. And today? Putin
rules increasingly lonely and unteachable, authoritarian, aggressive,
even totalitarian internally and externally, and wages war. Those who
dare to call a spade a spade must exchange their freedom for prison. The
course of history is sometimes cruel. Thirty years after Mikhail
Gorbachev's great political thaw, this largest country on earth is ruled
by forces that do not stand for what he has tried to strive for.

**W.H. In 1985 Gorbachev became general secretary of the CPSU and thus
head of government, and we learned what ‹Glasnost› and ‹Perestroika›
mean. What did it mean to you as a political activist during the Cold
War?**

G.H. The Cold War became more and more dangerous. In the mid-80s, we had
50 times overkill. In other words, the East and West's arsenal of
nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons was so vast that it could have
wiped out humanity 50 times. In addition, the warning times became
shorter and shorter. I fought in the peace movement at the time. We
advocated for unilateral disarmament. We declared: «I am ready to live
without the protection of military armament!» We were convinced that we
had to be the ones who started, and then the other side would follow.
The government at the time declared us naïve and dangerous. After all,
everyone was afraid of the Soviet Union or the Russians. They said: if
the West disarms, the other side will take advantage of it.

Then the unbelievable happened: the Secretary General of the Soviet
Union, which is considered the greatest threat, declared before the
French National Assembly, declared in the German Bundestag, and declared
in the American Congress that we had to end the arms race. The Soviet
Union would, therefore, unilaterally withdraw nuclear missiles, and he
suggested that the other side do the same. He changed the world and the
course of history. And the man did not speak coldly, calculatingly, in a
calculation, but openly, honestly, from the heart. You could feel that
he was serious. What no Western or European politician had dared to do,
he, Gorbachev, dared to do so. You could feel tremendous joy moving
around the globe.

What came out of it was impressive. The cycle of mutual arming was
stopped. The nuclear warheads were destroyed in a controlled manner
under the eyes of both sides. Not only that: but from then on, observers
from the other side were present during maneuvers and more significant
troop movements. Trust was formed. Gorbachev's impact went beyond the
military. The Iron Curtain between East and West, the wall and barbed
wire that divided Germany and Europe, fell due to the freedom Gorbachev
granted to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. The eastern
military alliance, the Warsaw Pact, dissolved, later also COMECON, the
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, and the Soviet Union itself. To
this end, the NATO-Russia Council, or the Partnership for Peace, was
formed. At the time, I hoped: «Now Europe is growing together! A common
space of security and freedom. We will create a large, demilitarized
zone in which we no longer secure peace against each other, but with
each other, by constantly strengthening trust -- including Russia!»

**W.H. «Dangers await those who do not react to life.» This is what
Gorbachev said during his visit to Germany. This became: «If you come
too late, life punishes you.» What did he mean?**

G.H. In intellectual life, ideology prevailed, in politics, a centralist
apparatus, and in the economy, plan. And now their top representative
says you have to listen to life. On the living -- and on the developing
and changing in time, the people. Learning from life means the end of
every totalitarian claim. With this sentence, Gorbachev adopted ideology
such as the party's claim to power, functionaries and apparatchiks,
centralism, and plan -- and relied on life: the power of a living spirit
that can ignite and change the whole world. That's how people understood
him. And they experienced it as support. Because he was speaking into a
tense situation on October 6, 1989, when the GDR gerontocracy wanted to
be celebrated, although the people had long since grown tired of the
totalitarian masquerade. Unlike his predecessors, Gorbachev rarely read.
He expressed himself spontaneously in conversation. He wanted to talk to
people and learn from them. He preferred to mingle with the people, a
nightmare for the security personnel. This is also the case here.
Gorbachev broke protocol and ran to a group of people who surrounded him
immediately. He spoke freely, improvised, earnestly, and authentically.
The shape matched the content. Gorbachev encouraged his friends in the
GDR. They now knew that Russia would not send tanks, unlike in 1953 and
1968.

**W.H. How could Gorbachev's ideas possibly come to the forefront of the
CPSU's wheels?**

![](hafner-handshake.jpg){class="alarge"}

G.H.: Yes, how could this happen? Lenin -- Stalin -- Malenkov --
Khrushchev -- Brezhnev -- Andropov -- Chernenko -- these were his
predecessors as general secretaries of the CPSU. It is worthwhile to
visualize these physiognomies, these characters, for a moment. Then the
contrast becomes clearer. Mikhail Gorbachev was born as a farm boy in
the North Caucasus. Few people know that his grandfather was arrested
under Stalin and disappeared for 14 months. The family had to worry
whether the beloved grandfather would come home again. Gorbachev rose
early in the party, was at first secretary for the youth, then for
agriculture, and a member of the Central Committee. He was considered
capable and the man of the future. His great patron was Yuri Andropov,
the former KGB chief, who, seriously ill and so only briefly in office,
tried his hand at a renewal of socialism and was looking for young,
mentally fresh cadres.

**W.H. In 1999 he said in the German Bundestag: The unity of Germany had
opened up «against the background of global changes a perspective for
the transition of the world community to a new, peaceful stage in world
history.» What do you think about that?**

G.H. That's true. The Cold War was over, Europe on its way to reuniting
in freedom, and the window wide open for a new, lasting peace order. But
unfortunately, only for a short time. Then it was shut closed. From both
sides. Unfortunately, I have to say that the West did not seize
Gorbachev's wholeheartedly open hand. Or only to the extent that we
benefited from it. That is why it is not enough for us to thank him for
German unity. What Gorbachev wanted, a ‹common house of Europe›, in
common, partnership-based security, was increasingly thwarted by the
West and, in the end, literally trampled underfoot.

Expansion of NATO to the East? Stationing new strategic weapons? INF
Treaty? George W. Bush Jr. did not think that one had to stick to the
promises made by his father. His reasoning: «We won the Cold War!» This
is the historical fault of the West.

Added to this is the tragic irony of history that the changes initiated
by Gorbachev have brought many countries of the world a dividend of
freedom and peace but ultimately excluded his own country. Here, too, we
are partly to blame. Because in the middle and the West, there was no
will to help the spiritually, socially, and politically devastated
Russia onto its feet, similar to what was done in Germany after the
Second World War. Instead, a triumphalism spread in the West that helped
Russia less than it humiliated it. This, but even more so, the yawning
spiritual emptiness, the political stagnation, and the economic lethargy
after three-quarters of a century of planned economy and totalitarianism
plunged the country into a trauma of lost power and lost order and
greatness. Aggressive nationalism thrives on this soil. That Russia is
now making an unsuitable attempt to restore this sunken greatness
through warlike invasion and subjugation of its neighbors is
inexcusable.

**W.H. One of the images of this time of upheaval is the hike of
Gorbachev and Helmut Kohl on the banks of the Bolshoi Zelenchuk River.
As cardigan diplomacy, the conversation went down in history.**

G.H. People make politics. Always. In the end, the people always
continue to spin the wheel of history in one direction or another.
Gorbachev showed this emblematically when he ended the rule of the
apparatus or the war in Afghanistan, overcame totalitarianism, and
dissolved the Warsaw Pact. He was a man of inner strength and substance.
Everything was tentative. The goal was not clear, only the attitude.
Thus, Gorbachev was initially an opponent of German unity; he feared the
expansion of NATO to the east. It was only because of his experiences
with the people in both Germanies and the rapprochement and confidence
building in the talks with Kohl and Genscher that he changed his mind.

**W.H. He has been celebrated like John Kennedy once was.**

G.H. That's true. It should not be forgotten that Helmut Kohl compared
him to Goebbels in ‹Newsweek› in 1986. This is an example of how hateful
the view from West to East was at that time and how important it was
that Kohl himself was able to overcome this view in the encounters. He
later had to apologize for this in the Bundestag. You can't say that it
was easy for Kohl to apologize. I don't remember any other apology from
him, although he often had reason to do so. That says more about
Gorbachev than about Kohl. The persuasive nature made such a comparison
seem impossible. What fascinated people so much? I believe it was his
palpable authenticity, integrity, and moral substance. By the way,
Raissa Gorbachev, his incredibly endearing wife, who accompanied him
everywhere, also contributed to the positive image.

![](hafner-gorba-sketch.jpg){class="a"}

**W.H. And that is not enough if this outstretched hand is not
accepted?**

G.H. Gorbachev's hand was gladly accepted. But ultimately, only where
the West also expected advantages. On the other hand, it was rejected
where it would have been up to us to help and act unilaterally. Above
all, however, his path led into the void. Because where he wanted to go,
there was nothing. No idea, no support. That was and is also our
omission. Gorbachev has, and this is his most significant merit, ended
the cruel ‹socialist experiment in the East.› Propagated as an
alternative to capitalism, it had failed long before it due to its lack
of freedom. Glasnost and Perestroika led to freedom and change -- but
what did that mean for the economic system? Just as capitalism is blind
to the social, socialism is blind to freedom. They were looking for a
way that combined freedom and sociality. But Gorbachev had no idea for a
new economic order. And without a guiding idea and strategy, the
unleashed forces of material egoism made the country its own. The former
state economy fell into the hands of a caste of oligarchs and
kleptocrats. If -- and here we have to look at ourselves -- a political
and economic order would have been available at that time that could
combine freedom, democracy, and socialism, and if the steps had been
clear, it might have turned out differently. They did not exist -- and
so the ‹national wealth› moved in opaque ways into the hands of the
oligarch circles. It is they who, together with Putin, determine the
Russian economy and politics today. He has lost everything. He has lost
power, his influence, his excellent reputation, and his standing in the
country. He put everything at risk.

**W.H. What do we owe Gorbachev?**

G.H. We should pick up where he left off, everyone in their own way. He
was a terrifically successful loser. He lost everything. He lost power,
his influence, his excellent reputation, and his standing in the
country. He put everything at risk. Gorbachev had to go through this
gate to win the most valuable thing: Glasnost and Perestroika -- human
freedom and development. This Gorbachev power to go through the zero
point to dedicate oneself to insight, the living, and a new quality of
will, which I desire for all people. Gorbachev's work is not complete.
It calls for us to continue: to marry freedom, democracy, and socialism.

**W.H. Gorbachev, the great idealist and realist in this hour of
history, to whom the environment did not resonate and who missed the
mark. Is that it?**

G.H. Yes. That doesn't just concern me with him. There is one or the
other with a tremendous impulse. And you ask yourself: Where are those
who understand him, who cooperate congenially? Why couldn't we do
otherwise? Why couldn't the people of Russia react differently to
Gorbachev? Why did he find so many admirers, so many profiteers, and so
few genuine comrades-in-arms? History is always a struggle of
antagonistic forces, and progress is relative, never absolute.

**W.H. Here we touch on an archetype that belongs to the myth of
Christianity -- the one and the henchmen, the light and darkness that
does not receive it.**

G.H. That's right. Whereby this gesture is transformed -- I maintain:
shifted more and more to the inner scene. We are less spectators of an
external event. Whether or not we know it, we are more involved in it.
Gorbachev could do what he did from a position of absolute power, as
held by a general secretary of the CPSU in the Soviet system at the
time. But he himself has abolished this position. It no longer exists.
In the future, it will be less and less about an individual determining
the course of humanity like a ‹leader›. Instead, it is essential to
understand that we all bear this responsibility to determine this
course. It is, therefore, increasingly important that we learn something
that has succeeded in parts under and through Gorbachev, for example,
for a time, in the citizens' movement of the GDR, in Poland, in the
Baltic States, Armenia, and Georgia. There lived a substance that
allowed people to stand against tanks with candles. But that only
carried on for a short while. German and European unity is stuck
halfway. Spiritually, what has separated us has not been overcome. The
bridge between the Western and Eastern systems has not been built.

**W.H. Resonance was missing. How does this phenomenon manifest itself
in the macro-social and micro-social?**

G.H. I can hardly imagine a more hostile environment than the Central
Committee of the CPSU. The fact that he has nevertheless achieved so
much shows his strength. If you want to make a difference today, you
must work together. The time of outstanding individual personalities is
coming to an end. They are replaced by collegial cooperation. We need
them today in a broad sense. It helps to hear what is speaking to me
from the other person(s). Where can I serve good development? The
conversation replaces the decree. That was also Gorbachev's gesture.
Perestroika means the law of human development and Glasnost spiritual
freedom as its prerequisite. Gorbachev has thus erected two pillars.
Spiritual freedom and development are the foundations of any worldview
that does not lead to compulsion or isms but constantly transforms and
evolves with people. Added to this was the gesture of open arms: Let's
build a common house Europe, let's disarm together! Where we make these
three gestures our task, we are on the way to continuing Gorbachev's
work.

****Drawings**** by Sofia Lismont -- Translation from the German: Monika
Werner

[Gerald Häfner](https://dasgoetheanum.com/en/author/geraldhafner/)

Born 1956. German politician (Bündnis 90/Die Grünen), member of the
German Bundestag (1987-2002) and the European Parliament (2009-2014).
Publicist and Waldorf teacher. Co-founder of Mehr Demokratie, Democracy
International. Since 2015 head of the Section for Social Sciences at the
Goetheanum, Dornach, Switzerland.
