# The Crushing of American Socialism

![](debs-1.jpg){class="a"}

### The Never-Ending Impact of a Forgotten Blitzkrieg Against the American Left

## By Adam Hochschild

Donald Trump has had the urge to crush many things, including the last
election. So I must admit I found it eerily amusing that, when the FBI
entered his estate at Mar-a-Lago recently, they did so under a warrant
[authorized
by](https://www.lawfareblog.com/donald-trump-and-espionage-act) the
Espionage Act of 1917. History certainly has a strange way of returning
in our world and also of crushing alternatives. Whatever Trump did, that
act has a sorry track record in both its own time and ours when it has
[been
used](https://www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2017/06/28/534682231/once-reserved-for-spies-espionage-act-now-used-against-suspected-leakers),
including [by his
administration](https://theintercept.com/2022/08/16/trump-espionage-act-classified-documents/),
to silence the leakers of government information. And because my latest
book, [*American Midnight: The Great War, A Violent Peace, and America's
Forgotten
Crisis*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0358455464/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
is about the crushing of alternatives a century ago in this country, in
the midst of all this, I couldn't help thinking about a part of our
history that The Donald would undoubtedly have been the first to crush,
if he had the chance.  

But let me start with a personal event closer to the present. While
visiting Denmark recently, I developed an infection in my hand and
wanted to see a doctor. The hotel in the provincial city where I was
staying directed me to a local hospital. I was quickly shown into a
consulting room, where a nurse questioned me and told me to wait. Only a
few minutes passed before a physician entered the room, examined me, and
said in excellent English, yes, indeed, I did need an antibiotic. He
promptly swiveled in his chair, opened a cabinet behind him, took out a
bottle of pills, handed it to me, and told me to take two a day for 10
days. When I thanked him and asked where I should go to pay for the
consultation and the medicine, he responded simply, "We have no
facilities for that."

[]{#anchor}No facilities for that.

It's a phrase that comes back to me every time I'm reminded how, in the
world's richest nation, we still don't have full national health
insurance. And that's far from the only thing we're missing. In a
multitude of ways, we're known for having a far weaker social safety net
than many other wealthy countries and behind that lies a history in
which the Espionage Act played a crucial role.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0358455464/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

A Danish friend who visited with me recently was appalled to find
hundreds of homeless people living in tent encampments in Berkeley and
Oakland, California. And mind you, this is a progressive, prosperous
state. The poor are even more likely to fall through the cracks (or
chasms) in many other states.

Visitors from abroad are similarly astonished to discover that American
families regularly pay astronomical college tuitions out of their own
pockets. And it's not only well-off [European
countries](https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/glaeser/files/why_doesnt_the_u.s._have_a_european-style_welfare_state.pdf)
that do better in providing for their citizenry. The average Costa
Rican, with one-sixth the annual per capita income of his or her North
American counterpart, will live [two years
longer](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/08/30/costa-ricans-live-longer-than-we-do-whats-the-secret),
thanks largely to that country's comprehensive national health care
system.

Why hasn't our country done better, [compared to so many
others](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-37159686)? There are
certainly many reasons, not least among them the relentless,
decades-long propaganda barrage from the American right, painting every
proposed strengthening of public health and welfare --- from
unemployment insurance to Social Security to Medicare to Obamacare ---
as an ominous step down the road to socialism.

This is nonsense, of course, since the classic definition of socialism
is public ownership of the means of production, an agenda item not on
any imaginable American political horizon. In another sense, though, the
charge is historically accurate because, both here and abroad,
significant advances in health and welfare have often been spearheaded
by socialist parties.

The globe's first national healthcare system, in Imperial Germany, was,
for example, muscled through the Reichstag by Chancellor Otto von
Bismarck in 1883 [precisely to
outflank](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/bismarck-tried-end-socialisms-grip-offering-government-healthcare-180964064/)
the German socialists, who had long been advocating similar measures.
Nor was it surprising that Britain's National Health Service was
installed by the Labour Party when it took power after the Second World
War.

And in the United States, early in the last century, some of President
Theodore Roosevelt's modest moves to regulate business and break up
trusts were, in fact, designed to steal a march on this country's
socialists, whom he feared, as he wrote to a friend, were "far more
ominous than any populist or similar movement in times past."

Back then --- however surprising it may seem today --- the American
Socialist Party was indeed part of our political reality and, in 1904,
it had come out [in favor of compulsory national health
insurance](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1447696/). A
dozen years after that, New York Socialist Congressman Meyer London
introduced a bill strikingly similar to the Obama administration's
Affordable Care Act of more than a century later. In 1911, another
socialist congressman, Victor Berger of Wisconsin, proposed a national
old-age pension, a goal that wouldn't be realized for another quarter of
a century with the passage of the Social Security Act of 1935.

Socialism was never as strong a movement in the United States as in so
many other countries. Still, once it was at least a force to be reckoned
with. Socialists became mayors of cities as disparate as Milwaukee,
Pasadena, Schenectady, and Toledo. Party members held more than 175
state and local offices in Oklahoma alone. People commonly point to 1912
as the party's high-water mark. That year, its candidate for president,
[Eugene V.
Debs](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/02/18/eugene-v-debs-and-the-endurance-of-socialism),
won 6% of the popular vote, even running ahead of the Republican
candidate in several states.

Still, the true peak of American socialism's popularity came a few years
later. The charismatic Debs decided not to run again in 1916, mistakenly
accepting President Woodrow Wilson's implied promise to keep the United
States out of the First World War --- something most Socialists cared
about passionately. In April 1917, Wilson infuriated them by bringing
the country into what had been, until then, primarily a European
conflict, while cracking down fiercely on dissidents who opposed his
decision. That fall, however, the Socialists made impressive gains in
municipal elections, winning more than 20% of the vote in 14 of the
country's larger cities --- more than 30% in several of them --- and 10
seats in the New York State Assembly.

During that campaign, Wilson was particularly dismayed by the party's
popularity in New York City, where Socialist lawyer Morris Hillquit was
running for mayor. The president asked his conservative Texan attorney
general, Thomas Gregory, what could be done about Hillquit's "outrageous
utterances" against the war. Gregory responded that he feared
prosecuting Hillquit "would enable him to pose as a martyr and would be
likely to increase his voting strength. I am having my representatives
in New York City watch the situation rather carefully, and if a point is
reached where he can be proceeded against it will give me a great deal
of pleasure." Hillquit lost, but did get 22% of the vote.

Jubilant Socialists knew that if they did equally well in the 1918
midterm elections, their national vote total could for the first time
rise into the millions. For Wilson, whose Democrats controlled the House
of Representatives by the narrowest of margins, the possibility of
Socialists gaining the balance of power there was horrifying. And so,
already at war in Europe, his administration in effect declared war on
the Socialists at home as well, using as its primary tool Wilson's
sweeping criminalization of dissent, the new 1917 [Espionage
Act](https://www.mtsu.edu/first-amendment/article/1045/espionage-act-of-1917).
The toll would be devastating.

**The Government's Axe Falls**

Already the party's most popular woman, the fiery Kansas-born orator
[Kate Richards
O'Hare](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kate_Richards_O%27Hare) --- known
as Red Kate for her politics and her mass of red hair --- had been
sentenced to five years under the Espionage Act for speaking out against
the war. Still free on appeal, O'Hare, who knew the hardships of farm
life firsthand and had run for both the House and the Senate, continued
to draw audiences in the thousands when she spoke in the prairie states.
Before long, however, her appeal was denied and she was sent to the
Jefferson City, Missouri, penitentiary, where she found herself in the
adjoining cell to anarchist firebrand Emma Goldman. The two would become
lifelong friends.

In 1918, the government went after Debs. The pretext was a speech he had
given from a park bandstand in Canton, Ohio, following a state
convention of his beleaguered party. "They have always taught you that
it is your patriotic duty to go to war and to have yourselves
slaughtered at their command," he told the crowd. "But in all the
history of the world you, the people, never had a voice in declaring
war."

That was more than enough. Two weeks later, he was indicted and swiftly
brought before a federal judge who just happened to be the former law
firm partner of President Wilson's secretary of war. At that trial, Debs
spoke words that would long be quoted:

> "Your Honor, years ago I recognized my kinship with all living beings,
> and I made up my mind that I was not one bit better than the meanest
> of the earth. I said then, I say now, that while there is a lower
> class, I am in it; while there is a criminal element, I am of it;
> while there is a soul in prison, I am not free."

Spectators gasped as the judge pronounced sentence on the four-time
presidential candidate: a fine of \$10,000 and 10 years in prison. In
the 1920 election, he would still be in the federal penitentiary in
Atlanta when he received more than 900,000 votes for president.

The government didn't merely prosecute luminaries like O'Hare and Debs
however. It also went after rank-and-file party members, not to mention
the former Socialist candidates for governor in Minnesota, New Jersey,
and South Dakota, as well as state Socialist Party secretaries from at
least four states and a former Socialist candidate for Congress from
Oklahoma. Almost all of them would be sentenced under the Espionage Act
for opposing the war or the draft.

Not faintly content with this, the Wilson administration would attack
the Socialists on many other fronts as well. There were then more than
100 socialist dailies, weeklies, and monthlies and the Espionage Act
gave Wilson's postmaster general, segregationist [Albert
Burleson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_S._Burleson#Postmaster_General)
of Texas, the power to deem such publications "unmailable." Before long,
Burleson would bar from the mail virtually the entire socialist press,
which, in the prewar years, had a combined circulation of two million. A
few dailies, which did not need the Post Office to reach their readers,
survived, but for most of them such a banning was a death blow.

The government crippled the socialist movement in many less formal ways
as well. For instance, Burleson's post office simply stopped delivering
letters to and from the party's Chicago headquarters and some of its
state and local offices. The staff of a socialist paper in Milwaukee
typically noticed that they were failing to receive business
correspondence. Even their mail subscriptions to the *New York Times
*and the *Chicago Tribune* were no longer arriving. Soon advertising
income began to dry up. In the midst of this, Oscar Ameringer, a writer
for the paper, called on a longtime supporter, a baker who had suddenly
stopped buying ads. According to Ameringer, the man "slumped down in a
chair, covered his eyes and, with tears streaming through his fingers,
sobbed, 'My God, I can't help it...They told me if I didn't take my
advertising out they would refuse me... flour, sugar and coal.'"

Also taking their cues from the administration in that wartime assault
were local politicians and vigilantes who attacked socialist speakers or
denied them meeting halls. After progressives and labor union members
staged an antiwar march on the Boston Common, for example, vigilantes
raided the nearby Socialist Party office, smashed its doors and windows,
and threw furniture, papers, and the suitcase of a traveling activist
out the shattered windows onto a bonfire.

In January 1918, the mayor of Mitchell, South Dakota, ordered the
party's state convention broken up and all delegates expelled from town.
One party leader was seized "on the streets by five unknown men and
hustled into an automobile in which he was driven five miles from town,"
a local newspaper reported. "There he was set out upon the prairie
and... told to proceed afoot to his home in Parkston \[an 18-mile walk\]
and warned not to return."

**The Big "What if?" Question**

The Socialists were far from alone in suffering the wave of repression
that swept the country in Wilson's second term. Other targets included
the labor movement, the country's two small rival Communist parties, and
thousands of radicals who had never become American citizens and were
targeted for deportation. But among all the victims, no organization was
more influential than the Socialist Party. And it never recovered.

When Debs took to the road again after finally being released from
prison in 1921, he was often, at the last minute, denied venues he had
booked. In Cleveland, the City Club canceled its invitation; in Los
Angeles, the only place he could speak was at the city zoo. Still, he
had an easier time than the socialist writer Upton Sinclair who, when he
began giving a speech in San Pedro, California, in 1923, was arrested
while reading the First Amendment aloud.

By the time Debs died in 1926, the party that had once elected 33 state
legislators, 79 mayors, and well over 1,000 city council members and
other municipal officials had closed most of its offices and was left
with less than 10,000 members nationwide. Kate Richards O'Hare wrote to
her friend Emma Goldman, who had been deported from the United States in
1919, that she felt herself a "sort of political orphan now with no
place to lay my head."

Despite their minority status, the Socialists had been a significant
force in American politics before patriotic war hysteria brought on an
era of repression. Until then, Republican and Democratic legislators had
voted for early-twentieth-century reform measures like child labor laws
and the income tax in part to stave off demands from the Socialist Party
for bigger changes.

If that party had remained intact instead of being so ruthlessly
crushed, what more might they have voted for? This remains one of the
biggest "what ifs" in American history. If the Socialist Party hadn't
been so hobbled, might it at least have pushed the mainstream ones into
creating the sort of stronger social safety net and national health
insurance systems that people today take for granted in countries like
Canada or Denmark? Without the Espionage Act, might Donald Trump have
been left to rot at Mar-a-Lago in a world in which so much might have
been different?

The last time you tried to pay a medical bill, might you, in fact, have
been told, "We have no facilities for that"?

![](Pictures/2000000700001F4900001F03E60648DD.svm){width="8.01cm"
height="7.939cm"}

Copyright 2022 Adam Hochschild

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Adam Hochschild](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/adamhochschild/)

**Adam Hochschild**,
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/adam-hochschild-our-country-under-censorship/)[ regular,](https://tomdispatch.com/adam-hochschild-our-country-under-censorship/)
teaches at the Graduate School of Journalism, University of California
at Berkeley. He is the author of 11 books, including [*King Leopold's
Ghost*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0358212502/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20) and [*Spain
in Our Hearts: Americans in the Spanish Civil War,
1936-1939*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0544947231/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
His latest book is [*American Midnight: The Great War, a Violent Peace,
and Democracy's Forgotten
Crisis*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0358455464/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/) where this article first appeared without the images.
