![](foundation.jpg){class="a"}

# Thoughts about the Foundation Stone

## Ernst Katz 

### The Foundation Stone

The General Anthroposophical Society was founded at the famous Christmas
Conference,1 which took place in Dornach, Switzerland, from December 24,
1923, to January 1, 1924, with approximately 800 members attending. Here
Rudolf Steiner spoke the Foundation Stone and exhorted his listeners to
take these verses into their hearts. The Foundation Stone consists of
three similarly structured panels of twenty-two lines each and a
different fourth panel of twenty-five lines. The verses were not given
all at once, but in parts, spread over different days. In addition, on
each of seven days Rudolf Steiner wrote on a blackboard certain sets of
selected lines, which he referred to as "rhythms." He indicated that
meditation on these "rhythms" is essential for penetrating to the inner
substance of the Foundation Stone.

There exist more than a dozen different translations of these verses. Consultation with several
translations is necessary if one wishes to grasp the fine nuances of
meaning in the original, for no single translation can render fully all
aspects of these verses. Each translator comes up with a compromise. The
translation at the beginning of this essay attempts to render faithfully
into English the meaning of the German original while retaining as
closely as possible its pattern of beat and some of its sound quality,
thus preserving its mantric quality in a form suitable for meditation.

### The Inner Nature, of the Foundation Stone

Born out of fire, through pain and suffering, that magical formula, the
Foundation Stone, is destined to guide the souls of seeking human
beings, in the present time and in centuries to come, toward solutions
of the great riddles of existence, toward overcoming the great scourges
of our time---deep loneliness, desperate anxiety, and tragic
confusion---by touching the timeless, ever-flowing wellsprings of
spirit-life, spirit-love, and spirit-light, behind which the mystery of
Christ holds sway. Ancient Wisdom told that the Dark Age---Kali
Yuga---would last till the end of the nineteenth century. The great
challenge of the twentieth century was to establish the new, enlightened
mysteries, which, unlike the ancient secret mysteries, are open to all
who earnestly seek them. Openness and universality are called for in the
present time. Openness is the hallmark of the Mystery of Golgotha, the
greatest and most universal of all mysteries. Enacted on the physical
plane of world historic events, its open secrets await to be illuminated
more and more in our time and in times to come.

It was Rudolf Steiner's
destiny to meet these challenges. Loftiest cosmic spirit powers, whose
central concern is the destiny of mankind, guided Rudolf Steiner to
shape the verses of the Foundation Stone as a true spiritual
cornerstone, a living seed, for the new mysteries, which recognize the
unique and central significance of the Mystery of Golgotha, the Mystery
of the Risen Christ. Note well, the Foundation Stone is a living seed.
Secretly enfolded therein lies infinite life and wisdom, which spring
forth when it is planted in the right soil. Where is this soil that must
embrace the seed and bring forth its hidden life? It is the heart, the
soul, of the individual human being who has found the way to the new
mysteries. How can this seed be kept alive in these arid times and be
allowed to germinate, grow, and reveal its hidden treasures? Many a
student of anthroposophy has tried to enliven this seed by devoting
attention and care to its verses, only to discover after some time that
it has become stale. It is no longer life-giving, rather it feels like a
foreign object in the soul. If the Foundation Stone, that open mystery,
is not approached with the right attitude of soul, it will wither and
reveal none of its secret magic. What is the right attitude with which
to approach this soul mystery? Certainly all mysteries should be
approached with a mood of reverence and wonder, with persistence and
clarity of thought, and with openness and sensitivity. But all of this
is not enough. In our time one further step of preparation must be
taken, one additional virtue must be cultivated by the seeking human
being, and this is indeed the most essential virtue. What is this most
essential virtue? In each cultural epoch one eminent virtue is told
about by a major legend. For our epoch Rudolf Steiner indicated that
this is the legend of Parsifal's search for the Holy Grail. The eminent
virtue that Parsifal must develop is: To ask at the right time the right
human question as it springs from the heart. People today are quite good
at asking all sorts of questions: clever, intellectual, irrelevant, even
nonsensical questions. But the ability to ask questions that spring from
the heart is often lacking. However, in order to be acceptable to the
spiritual world, souls of the present epoch must develop the virtue of
asking questions that spring from the heart.

What happens when one approaches the Foundation Stone with questions of the heart? It comes
alive and grows---and yields growing answers. These answers are not
abstract or intellectual. They are lifeforces, which awaken and sustain
the soul. Thus conversation with the verses can become a living source
of inspiration. This is the magic of the Foundation Stone: it can awaken
life-giving, life-sustaining soul forces. But if one fails to approach
its verses with questions of the heart one will find oneself, as it
were, rejected. Thus the Foundation Stone can be experienced as
belonging to the mysteries surrounding the Holy Grail.

The inner conversation with the Foundation Stone might well begin by asking: For
whom are these verses intended? The answer springs forth immediately:
Three of its four panels open with the call "Human Soul!"
(Menschenseele) and close with the admonition "May human beings hear
it." The fourth panel tells of Christ's mission on earth, which is valid
for all of mankind. The Foundation Stone addresses itself to "all who
have ears to hear it." It is intended for all who are willing to listen
to it intimately, to work with it in a living way, with the forces of
heart and soul.

Why is the Foundation Stone built of three similar
panels and a fourth panel of markedly different tone and structure? This
order can be seen as an imprint of the cosmos. Of the twelve signs of
the zodiac, four are called principal signs. A simplified view may take
these four signs as representing the zodiac. They are: 

- Taurus, the Bull, which is related to the human metabolic system: limbs and digestion.
- Leo, the Lion, which is related to the human rhythmical system, centered in heart and lungs.
- Scorpio, the Scorpion, originally called the Eagle, which is related to the human system of nerves and senses, centered in the head.
- Aquarius, the Waterman, more accurately the Etheric Human Form, which is related to the life that permeates and integrates the whole human body. 

The four panels of the Foundation Stone
clearly relate to the four principal signs of the zodiac: the first
panel to the limbs, and thereby to Taurus, the second panel to heart and
lungs, and thereby to Leo, the third panel to the head, and thereby to
Scorpio, and the fourth panel to Christ as the integrating force of the
human body.

How does the Christ-impulse work as the integrating force of
the human body? First, it permeates the limbs, resulting in the upright
human posture; secondly, it permeates the rhythmic system, resulting in
the faculty of speech; thirdly, it permeates the nerve-and-senses
system, resulting in our faculty of thinking. Walking, speaking, and
thinking, the human being owes to the Christ Spirit, Who imbued mankind
with these forces long, long ago, through three etheric sacrificial
deeds, the fruits of which reawaken with each small child when it learns
to walk, to speak, and to think. Through these sacrificial deeds the
forces of the Bull, the Lion, and the Eagle were made subservient to a
higher purpose. This goal became fully manifest in the earthly, fourth
sacrifice of Christ at the turning point of time, after the baptism by
John, a representative image of the Waterman. Thus the fourfold
structure of the Foundation Stone expresses the fact that the human
body, the Temple of God, functions according to cosmic laws, of which
the signs of the zodiac are an etheric image.

Now when one hears the Foundation Stone call thrice "Human Soul," this call resounds from the
cosmos as well as from our body, and we may ask: Who is it who calls
thus three times? The Foundation Stone answers thus: First note that the
Spirit who calls means well with the human being, for He points to three
tasks, the practice of which will enable one to "truly live," "truly
feel," and "truly think," in short, to become "truly human." Further,
observe that the Spirit who calls commands the spirits of all nine
hierarchic ranks to perform their tasks in the cosmos in a definite way,
namely, so that thereby the foundation is created on which the "truly
human" can develop. Therefore, the One who calls "Human Soul!" is a
being who is higher than all nine hierarchies! He is of divine rank. One
may feel awestruck by such a revelation.

![](foundation-stone-img-1.png){class="alarge"}

Meditation on the Foundation Stone is difficult because of its length
and its complexity. Rudolf Steiner anticipated this difficulty, for he
was a master teacher. He gave seven ways to enter into a relationship
with its verses. By focusing on seven simple sets of relationships, a
living entrance into the verses can be achieved. He called these
entranceways the seven "rhythms." They will be discussed in the next
section.

The Foundation Stone is not meant only to be listened to. It
asks that one shall "do" something. Out of one's own free will one is
asked to perform three specific inner activities, to practice three
specific soul virtues: spirit recalling, spirit meditating, and spirit
envisioning. One is advised to engage in three exercises in order to
travel the road toward truly human stature. This is clearly the core of
the Foundation Stone.

How can one understand the meaning of
spirit-recalling, spiritmeditating, and spirit-envisioning? One can give
starting points, seeds of meaning, as it were. They cannot be defined in a conventional way.
Rudolf Steiner often emphasized the importance of living thinking in
contrast to dead thinking. A dead thought can be understood but not
experienced. As soon as it is conceived, it is fully matured. As soon as
it is born, it is old. It cannot grow. A living thought, on the other
hand, can be experienced. It can be grasped, but only to a certain
extent, for the experience of its reality is dependent upon our own
maturity. As we grow and mature, so does the living thought within us
grow and mature. That is why Rudolf Steiner recommends the use of living
characterizations, rather than dead definitions. The living seeds of
meaning that characterize the experiences of spirit-recalling,
spirit-meditating, and spirit-envisioning can grow with practice. They
must be derived from the Foundation Stone Meditation itself. They will
enable us to become better aware of how we live in the element of time.
The Foundation Stone refers entirely to the present, the now. But the
present can be viewed from several aspects. One aspect is the past
insofar as the past makes itself felt in the present through the process
of remembering, or recalling. Whenever an event takes place in the past,
it will leave a trace somewhere that persists into the present and can
then be experienced anew. The first panel of the Foundation Stone
Meditation is imbued with this past-oriented aspect of the present. With
our ordinary faculty of remembering, we can call into the present many
of our experiences of events that happened in the past. The most remote
event we can normally recall is a point in early childhood when we first
used the word "I," usually about our third year of life. In a similar
fashion spiritrecalling brings into our present awareness what we
experienced in a much more distant past, in our past incarnations and in
our past states of spiritual existence. The most remote event one can
recall in this sense is a moment of indescribable grandeur, which can
only become conscious if it is approached with greatest devotion. It is
the moment when our "I" began to exist as an identifiable entity within
the "I of God," the WorldCreator, the Father. Through the practice of
spirit-recalling, we may gradually gain more and more clarity concerning
that timeless process of divine creation, whereby being "arises" out of
nonbeing. Neither the English nor the German language has an appropriate
word for this process of "arising," of "coming into being." It is
neither an evolutionary process nor a mere becoming. It is a creative
event, timeless and enduring. Rudolf Steiner coined a new word for it:
"erwesen." In English we would have to say, "coming into being from
non-being." This indicates the greatest span of time that can be
recovered by spirit-recalling.

How can one "practice" spirit-recalling?
No definite directive can be given, but one thing is certain: practice
implies a regularly recurring effort. It may be helpful to start with a
brief daily meditation on the words:

*"Your own 'I' comes into beingwithin the 'I of God.'"*

Such a meditation can gradually lead to the
experience of our own divine origin, neither as an abstract idea nor as
a source of pride, but as a wonderful, life-sustaining, life-enhancing
force. Actualization of this force is the fruit of spirit-recalling. The
meditation points to such a result with the words: "And you will truly
live." As one practices spiritrecalling and comes to experience this
life-enhancing force, one thereby understands better and better what
spirit-recalling really is. A second aspect of the present has to do
with the fact that the present is not merely an isolated point, but
rather a moment in a process, in a stream where forward is qualitatively
different from backward. Naturally this concept of a moment lends to
each moment a quality that depends on the process, or processes, of
which that moment is a part. In contrast to this living idea of time,
Newtonian time flows of itself from the infinite past uniformly toward
the infinite future. For such a conception of time, each moment has the
same quality as any other moment. This mechanical, dead concept of time
is not suitable for the description of living entities. For the living
world, time is characterized by cyclic processes. The ancients
experienced the universe as a living entity, and thus they conceived
time in terms of cyclic processes. For them, each moment was
qualitatively different, depending on its place in the cosmic cycles,
even as each moment of a day is different, depending upon what time of
day and what season it is.

Spirit-meditating points to that soul region
where cyclic processes, typified by becoming and fading away, play the
primary roles. It is the region of equanimity or balance of the soul
(Seelengleichgewicht). Such a balance is not a static or rigid state of
equilibrium. Rather, it involves an ever-recurring alternation of
surrender to the world and of retreat into the inner self. Emphasis on
the letter "w" in the German text of the verses reinforces this idea of
wavelike movement, of swelling and ebbing, of extroversion and
introversion. It is a profound mystery that in these rhythmic processes
of the present moment the divine spirit of Christ holds sway.

How can one practice spirit-meditating? The verses suggest that a good way to
start is to dwell regularly on the words: 

*"Unite your own 'I' with the 'I of the cosmos.'"*

Such a meditation can gradually lead to the
awareness that we live not alone in the cosmos. We live not only for the
sake of being an individual ego, but also for the sake of being a part
of the cosmos. Such an experience can produce a profound transformation
of our feeling life. Our feelings can expand their scope, become more
differentiated, and gain in richness. They become more and more true
feelings, as expressed in the line, "And you will truly feel."

A word of caution is in order here. Spirit-meditating is concerned with the polar
relation of our own "I" and its environment, the "I of the cosmos"
(Welten-Ich). It is a deeply veiled and holy mystery how the human soul
can only function properly by undergoing a process of rhythmical
balancing, wherein our own "I" and the "I of the cosmos" come together
and then recede again. For the process of coming together, the word
"uniting" was chosen, since this uniting takes place repeatedly, which
implies receding as well as returning. In this context "uniting" can
never mean losing or dissolving our own "I" in the "I of the cosmos."
What is the "I of the cosmos?" It is related to our own "I" like the
shell of a nut to its kernel. Rudolf Steiner uses the term "I of the
cosmos" (Welten-Ich) as an equivalent for the divine Christ-Spirit or
the Son. Spirit-meditating can reveal the nature of the uniting of one's
own "I" with the "I of the cosmos." As one practices spirit-meditating
in this sense, one can come closer to the life-giving Christ-force,
which the cosmos can bestow on the soul, and thereby one's understanding
grows of what spirit-meditating really is or can become.

A third aspect of time has to do with the future, insofar as the future casts its image
into the present moment. Human consciousness can be directed at will to
the future by means of our ability to plan, to set goals, and to chart
ways of achieving them, that is, by means of envisioning (erschauen).
This envisioning appears in microcosmic form as the human faculty of
setting goals and charting ways to achieve them. However, it has also a
macrocosmic form in the eternal divine aims and the divine ways of
bringing them about.

What are these divine aims? The verses encourage
one to ponder such a question in modesty and devotion, realizing that
one can only reach answers of humanly limited validity. Such a divine
goal---this may seem surprising at first---is the divine idea of
humanity, what human beings may become when all their spiritual
potentials of wisdom, love, and strength of goodness shall be fully
developed. All angelic efforts are directed toward the realization of
this wonderful goal.

Essential to this lofty goal is the creative,
spiritual love of each human being. Achieving this quality brings the
possibility of free willing, as explained in Rudolf Steiner's Philosophy
of Freedom. In free willing we act under no compulsion---neither from
nature nor from nurture---and introduce new primary causes into the
world. This free willing can be achieved, however, only if we have first
learned spirit-envisioning, which enables us to foresee the image of a
future that is not yet present, and thus we can rightly understand how
our intent will fit into the world. Such spirit-envisioning requires the
presence of an inner light within us. This inner light should not be
taken for granted. It is a divine gift, given to human beings for the
purpose of leading mankind to freedom.

How can one practice spirit-envisioning in this sense? The Foundation Stone suggests that one
can make a beginning by dwelling regularly on the words:

*"Light of cosmic being is granted to your own 'I' for your free willing."*

Such a meditation can gradually lead to a profound transformation of the
quality of one's thoughts. Their abstract, shadowy, foreign-to-theworld
character is transformed into one that is mobile, truth-seeking,
freely-directed, and more in harmony with the thoughts of the cosmos
(Weltgedanken). The Foundation Stone indicates such a result in the
line:

*"And you will truly think."*

The way in which cosmic thoughts
actuate divine aims in cosmic and human evolution is a deep and
marvelous mystery. The cosmic thoughts do not force any development, nor
do they impinge on human freedom. They provide the inner light, which
they draw (erflehen = to obtain through ardent supplication) from the
spiritual essence of the World (Weltenwesen), where it lives and weaves
as an emanation of the Holy Spirit, the third aspect of the divine
Trinity. Through a wonderful activity this light is passed on to human
beings, provided that they seek it, strive toward it, and ask for it
(erbitten = to obtain by asking.) As one grows into the practice of
spirit-envisioning, one can experience ever more fully the mystery of
this spirit light and its relationship to our free willing and strength
of goodness. Then one comes to understand better and better what
spirit-envisioning really ought to become.

When one begins to fathom how
each moment in time has a special quality of its own, one can then grasp
the idea that certain moments are of outstanding, decisive importance
for the realization of the divine aims. These moments are the "turning
points of time." Among them there is one that is the most important, the
most decisive. It is the one that is the subject of narration in the
fourth panel of the Foundation Stone.

Meditation on the Foundation Stone
means more than a gain in knowledge or insight. One can also experience
its healthful, healing quality, if one succeeds in awakening the
life-element that slumbers in its verses. One can now understand why the
elementary spirits on the whole earth listen to the words of these
verses. When Christ walked on the earth, the elementary spirits knew Who
He was long before human beings knew (Luke 4: 33-41,) and they cried it
out to man. In our time they hear the message of these verses, which
they understand, for elementary spirits are part of the etheric body of
the earth, which is radiated through by the Etheric Christ. But now they
are silent. They and, indeed, the entire cosmos wait in silent hope that
human beings may hear it. Is perhaps the Foundation Stone a path for
human beings to the experience of the Etheric Christ?

### The Significance of the "Rhythms"

During the Christmas Conference of 1923, Rudolf Steiner presented the
Foundation Stone in a most remarkable way. On most days of this
nine-days-long conference, only certain parts of this meditation were
recited. Only on December 25 and January 1, the verses were presented in
their entirety. On December 25 the four panels were recited in the order
4-1-2-3, while on January 1 the regular order of 1-2-3-4 was given, the
same order used when the verses were published a few weeks later. If one
looks closely, there were not less than fourteen differences among the
versions given on the various days and the printed version. Some
differences are minor, but others are quite significant. Such variations
in Rudolf Steiner's presentation of these verses emphasize the fact that
he treated them in a living, non-rigid way.

![](foundation-verses.jpg){class="alarge"}

On each of the seven days from December 26 to January 1, Rudolf Steiner
wrote on the blackboard certain sets of selected verses which he called
"rhythms." The use of the word, "rhythm," in this context has puzzled
many anthroposophists, who understand "rhythm" as a regular recurrence
of features or patterns. Clearly such a meaning does not fit here. The
American College Dictionary 2 gives several meanings of the word
"rhythm." The one that fits here is mentioned in earlier editions of
this dictionary but is not widely known and is deleted in more recent
editions: "a proper relation and interdependence of parts with reference
to one another and to an artistic whole." According to this definition,
a "rhythm" can be established by juxtaposing two short parts taken from
different places in the verses. The juxtaposition of short parts causes
a certain tension to be felt, which impels one to seek for their
relationship. In addition, the value of each part within the verses as a
whole can be sensed. Thus, each pair of parts which Rudolf Steiner wrote
on the blackboard becomes a challenge. We must not rest content with
understanding the meaning of each word or phrase. We should try to
become aware that in each "rhythm" a double relationship exists: on the
one hand, the two chosen parts are related to each other, and, on the
other hand, each part is related to the Foundation Stone as a whole.

Meditating on these "rhythms" is a free, creative thought-activity. It
can awaken questions that may lead to the kind of living conversation
with the verses discussed in section II. The beauty of this approach is
that one can become actively engaged in a process of living inner
growth. And one can come to recognize that these "rhythms," which Rudolf
Steiner carefully selected, are the seven principal doorways to the
living grasp of the entire Foundation Stone. If the Foundation Stone is
experienced as a living organic entity, then the seven "rhythms" are its
vital organs. On each of the seven days mentioned, Rudolf Steiner wrote
one new "rhythm" (a selected pair of lines) on the blackboard. The
accompanying table at the beginning of this section gives a survey of
the "rhythms" in relation to the days on which they were spoken.

The "rhythms" I, II, III, and IV each have three columns."Rhythm" V is
special in that the three practices are written in a special geometrical
pattern, suggesting as it were a protective dome for the second part of
the "rhythm," which is meant to be the same for the three columns.

"Rhythm" VI occupies a unique place among the "rhythms" in that there is
no division of its content into three columns. After this contraction,
"rhythm" VII expands again into three separate columns. On the evening
of January 1 during the final session of the conference, Rudolf Steiner
recited the entire Foundation Stone and then closed with what can be
called the "coda": 

*Light divine Christ-Sun\
Give warmth to our hearts Enlighten our heads.*

Strictly speaking, this "coda" is not a "rhythm" as
it does not consist of two parts. 

How can one work meditatively with the
"rhythms"? To meditate on the whole Foundation Stone is difficult
because of its great length and its complexity. By working with the
"rhythms," one can gain much more meaning from the verses than if one
merely recites the Foundation Stone daily, outwardly or inwardly.
Working with the "rhythms" can lead to a clearer survey of the
meditative content. It is a great discovery, made by Dr. F. W. Zeylmans
van Emmichoven,3 that the "rhythms" bear an intimate relation to the
days of the week on which they were given. Accordingly, Dr. Zeylmans
suggested meditating on the "rhythm" given on Wednesday (December 26,
1923) on every Wednesday, the "rhythm" given on Thursday (December 27)
on every Thursday, and so forth, so that in the course of a week one has
worked upon all seven "rhythms." If one does this week after week, the
question may then arise: Does one not neglect the Foundation Stone as a
whole by focusing only on its parts? I have found it helpful to work
with the "rhythms" in the morning and to dwell upon the whole Foundation
Stone before going to sleep in the evening.

A noteworthy feature of the
"rhythms" is that they come in three columns. How does this feature
enter into one's meditation? Consider the first "rhythm" as an example
of how this can work. The three activities of spirit recalling, spirit
meditating, and spirit envisioning are here not represented as tasks,
for the word "practice" is not included. Rather, the first "rhythm"
seems to ask that one consider what these words themselves mean. We have
already commented on how the first activity---spirit-recalling---can
lead one back to that early stage
of world-evolution when the human "I" came into being within the "I of
God."

Wonderful as this realization is, one may feel after a while an
incompleteness. The human "I" feels lonely if it can only be aware of
itself. It wishes to find something else. This something is given in the
second column of this "rhythm." Here, by spirit meditating, the human
"I" is united with the "I of the cosmos." How this uniting is to be
understood was commented on earlier. As the human "I" becomes aware of
the "I of the cosmos" and moves toward union with it, it may be seized
by a terrible fear, the fear of losing oneself. As a result the "I"
withdraws into its own self, albeit enriched by the momentary contact
with the "I of the cosmos." Thus an alternation of approaching and
withdrawing can come about. What is the enrichment that the human "I"
gains from this process? The third column of the "rhythm" gives the
answer to this question. By means of spirit-envisioning the "I" can
strive toward inner freedom and achieve it.

This sketchily drawn train
of thought is intended to show one possible way that one may proceed
from column to column while meditating on the first "rhythm." When this
meditation is deepened, one may become aware more specifically of what
the "I" gains by the activity performed in each column. The "I" receives
spirit-life by coming into being, as indicated in the first column. The
force that attracts the human "I" to the "I of the cosmos," as indicated
in the second column, can be recognized as spirit love. Through what is
contained in the third column, the "I" gains spirit-light. But this
light and the freedom that comes with it can become a source of
confusion if they are not rightly integrated into the world. The
individualized spirit-light wishes to find its connection with the
cosmic spirit-light. How this can come about is described in the fourth
column.

Each person who would like to take up meditating on the
"rhythms" needs to create an individual train of thought when moving
from column to column. One should explore various possibilities and hold
fast to what seems best, as long as it proves to be alive. Because
meditation on a "rhythm" is meant to be a creative and free activity of
the mind, many other approaches are possible. The above example is given
only as an indication. What matters most is that one forms the habit of
regular meditation, and that one does not remain at the level of
intellectual thought analysis but rather reaches deeper, so that
feelings and the will also become engaged.

The transition from one column of a "rhythm" to the next one is not
easy. A different way to work with the three columns of the "rhythms" is
to distribute such work over the seasons of the year, so that one works
at any one time only with one column of the "rhythms." I find the
following way quite effective. Through March, April, and May one works
with the "rhythms" of the first column, which relate mostly to the first
panel of the Foundation Stone. Through June, July, and August one works
with the "rhythms" of the second column, which relate mostly to the
second panel. Through September, October, and November one works with
the "rhythms" of the third column, which relate mostly to the third
panel. Finally, through December, January, and February one works only
with the fourth panel of the Foundation Stone and one allows the
"rhythms" to rest. A few examples indicating possible ways of how one
might work with one column of a "rhythm" follow.

Consider, for example, the case of a Wednesday in April. One would then choose to consider the
first column of "rhythm" I: 

*Spirit-recalling\
Your own "I" Comes into being\
Within the "I of God"*

This "rhythm" tells in effect what spirit
recalling is. By contemplating this "rhythm" we can become aware that we
bear within us that spiritual kernel which we call our "I." This "I" is
of divine origin. In fact, the "I" could not continue to exist if it
were not maintained in existence each and every moment by the Creator,
the "I of God." In earlier times the human "I" led a dormant existence,
but gradually during the evolution of the world and of humanity it has
become more awake. Rudolf Steiner has described the entire evolution of
the cosmos and of mankind in chapter four of his basic book An Outline
of Esoteric Science. 4 This description can be viewed as the result of
spirit recalling on a grand scale. Such considerations can give one a
great sense of purpose in life, as well as a feeling of gratitude and
awe. Many other feelings can arise and enliven the relationship between
these parts and the Foundation Stone as a whole.

Likewise, for a Wednesday in June one would consider in a similar way the second column
of the first "rhythm:"

*Spirit meditating Your own "I" 
Is united 
With the "I of the cosmos"*

Again the second part of this "rhythm" elucidates the meaning of spirit
meditating. Awareness of the union of one's own "I" with the world can
be achieved at several levels stage by stage. The highest level reaches
the "I of the cosmos." Thus spirit-meditating can guide a person along a
path of inner development. Rudolf Steiner describes this path in several
works, notably in the fifth chapter of An Outline of Esoteric Science.
There, union with the "I of the cosmos" is represented as union with the
"Greater Guardian of the Threshold," who is then recognized as the
Christ-Spirit.5 Also in his book How to Know Higher Worlds 6 this path
is described, and near the end we find the sentence: "An indescribable
splendor shines forth from the Second Guardian of the Threshold; union
with Him looms as a far distant ideal before the soul's vision." These
descriptions can be viewed as the result of spirit meditating with the
widest possible scope by Rudolf Steiner.

A similar treatment of the
third column of the first "rhythm" can be developed by relating it to
the sixth chapter of An Outline of Esoteric Science, where Rudolf
Steiner envisions the future consequences of the past evolution of
mankind and the world.

As a different and last example, consider the
"rhythm" for a Monday in any month from March to November:

*Light divine Christ-Sun
Thus hear it the elementary spirits in the East,West, North,South.
May human beings hear it!*

The elementary spirits make up the
etheric body of the earth. They live mostly near the surface of the
earth: the gnomes somewhat below the surface, as far down as plant roots
and crystals grow; the sylphs up in the atmosphere, as high as birds and
insects rise; and the undines in the domain that lies in between. Only
the fire-spirits penetrate deeper and also higher. Thus, on a global
scale the realm of the elementary spirits is mainly a very thin layer,
where up and down has very little significance in comparison with the
importance of East,West, North, and South. Into the etheric domain of
the earth, the sunlight penetrates. The light of the sun not only
illumines; it also carries etheric sound, which the elementary spirits
can hear. Goethe describes some of these etheric sounds of the sunlight
in his "Prologue" to Faust: "The sun resounds as in olden times in the
choir of fraternal spheres." In the first scene of the second part of
Faust, the elementary spirits are warned about the thunderous and
deafening sound of the rising sun.

Yet another light shines into the
world of the elementary spirits. It is the light that shines outward
from the Mystery of Golgotha. This light shines as a divine light
throughout the etheric body of the earth, the domain of the elementary
spirits. It is the light of a different kind of sun. Perhaps the most
concrete imagination of this sun and its radiance was envisioned in 1492
a.d. by Matthias Grünewald when he painted the resurrection panel of the
altar of the monastery of Isenheim. From this world famous painting one
can gain an impression, in a unique and almost magical way, of the
etheric sun-like radiance that emanates from the Christ as He rises from
the grave. In the etheric realm this Christ-Sun not only illumines. Its
light also sounds; it even carries messages which the human heart can
hear. The elementary spirits hear this message. Are we human beings
hearing it too? What is the message that sounds in this etheric divine
light?

Through Rudolf Steiner this message has come into expression as a
concrete inspiration in the entire Foundation Stone. May these
indications give an impression of how one can work with the "rhythms" of
the Foundation Stone, though each person must of course find her or his
individual meditative approach to its verses.

[The Foundation Stone Meditation and The Seven Rhythms](https://southerncrossreview.org/147/katz-rhythms.pdf)

**Ernst Katz** was one of the foremost teachers of Anthroposophy in America during the second half of the twentieth century. He was professor of physics at the University of Michigan and, quite likely, the only professor in the country who taught courses in both natural science and “spiritual” science at the university level. He also led anthroposophic study groups, which attracted people from all around southern Michigan and, ultimately, enriched the spiritual lives of people from coast to coast. 

[Español](https://southerncrossreview.org/147/katz-foundation-stone-esp)
