![](goya-letter.jpg){class="a"}

# Letters to the Editor

RE: [Breathe](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html) by Becky Hemsley

Becky hemsley,  what a beautiful poem Breathe. It reminds me of someone
growing up and people have different opinions about that person. And now
she can breath like she found peace or she now knows which  direction
her life is going . Beautiful. 

Fiona Watson

\*

This is an Amazing read. Thank you so much I can't wait to read more
keep writing. 

Sherri Melancon 

\*

Made me cry. Made me think about the difficulties of fitting in and
being yourself. 

Linda Hardy 

\*

Is a wonderful poem which helps validate how many women feel. 

Regina Nimmo

\*

Thank you for this beautiful poem. It made me lose my breathe because of
the relevance to what I am experiencing in life right now. Tobin

Karin Tobin

This is an incredible poem.  I want to post it in my classroom to
inspire my students. 

Susan Hirsch 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

RE: [Escape Route](https://southerncrossreview.org/145/fts-escape-route.html) by Frank Thomas Smith

Por un momento me imagino viviendo la vida actual como el protagonista
de Ruta de Escape. Suena como escapar de la vida que tanto pesa. Cuando
y donde para ese escape. En la realidad?

Horacio Bessone

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

RE: [A Girl I Knew](https://southerncrossreview.org/145/salinger-girl-i-knew.html) by J.D.Salinger

A story full of angst and desire that is always present in Salinger's
writings as well as misogynistic tendencies( I sometimes think he was
very much afraid of women) but Wow, this was first published by
Goodhousekeeping in '48 when I was 4 yrs old and I bet my mom read it
and was informed by it in many ways. Thanks much.

Kendall Weaver

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

RE: [Gorbachev](https://southerncrossreview.org/147/hafner-gorbacheef.html) by Gerhard Hafner

Thank you for your once again, great musing and offering. I would like
to also offer up that this type of oppression (& silencing) is
happening, right here in Australia and across the globe. Universities
are preventing critical freed-thought in their students since 2020 and
before.  \
Yours, in appreciation 

Julie Allan

RE: [A Military Rich in Dollars, Poor in People](https://southerncrossreview.org/146/military-mazzarino.html) by Andrea Mazzarino

While I am not surprised by what Ms. Mazzarino wrote, and while I well
know that our democracy here is on the thinnest of ice, it is disturbing
to read about it. I hadn't realized that our military is having troubles
recruiting people, though everything she wrote provides good and logical
reasons why this is so.

How do we improve things? I'm almost 82. I donate a lot to various
charitable causes, donate to some political ones, and I just wrote 75
get-out-the-vote postcards. Wish I'd started earlier and written more.
Of course I believe in honesty and I continue to be horrified by all the
downright lying that people---mostly Republicans, it seems---do with
impunity.

I hope with all my heart that ex-President Trump is indicted and
convicted for all the unlawful things he has done. How else can any
person in this country have even the beginnings of a handle on right and
wrong?!

And how to provide good social services without be accused of being a
socialist?!

Until this evening I'd never heard of the SouthernCrossReview. I was
sent it by a woman friend who wanted me to read Becky Hemsley's
"Breathe." Clearly my friend has had her share of criticism for being
who she is. I believe she is now getting some good therapy. I am
grateful for all the good up-bringing and advantages I have had.

I'll keep my eyes out for another edition of the SouthernCrossReview.
Thanks to whoever puts it out.

Anne Prescott

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

RE: [Tango](https://southerncrossreview.org/147/valenzuela-tango-eng.html) by Luisa Valenzuela

Qué buena ilustración, Frank! Tengo tu excelente traducción y me alegra
que la revivas.

Gracias y abrazos.

Luisa Valenzuela

\*

La vida es, o debería ser, como un tango, un baile, un corazón a flor de
piel, inundado de música rea, abierto y respetuoso.

Hermoso!

Horaco Bessone

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

RE: [Reincarnation Blues](https://southerncrossreview.org/147/reincarnation-blues-12.html)

Frank!

Qué buenos, alegres, estusiasmantes son tus Reincarnation Blues.\
Bravo, gracias y abrazos,

Luisa Valenzuela

\*

Cadencioso blues que me hace sentir probable, aún cuando no considero a
Dios improbable, más bién inescrutable para mi terrena, anhelante y
perfectible humanidad. Gracias Frank.

Horacio Bessone

\*\*\*
