# The Magic Mound

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 2

Sergio and Divino find the Magic Mound

It was late afternoon when Sergio and Divino started out, but there were
still several hours of daylight left. Sergio studied the rushing stream
which separated the house from the forest, then backed up and ran toward
it as fast as he could. At the last moment he gave a mighty leap and
landed safe and dry on the other side. Divino, knowing he couldn\'t jump
across as his brother had, stood on the bank and felt like crying.

\"Go back to the house,\" Sergio said. \"You\'re too small for this
job.\" Divino looked so sad that Sergio relented. \"Oh, all right, come
along downstream. Maybe there\'s a narrow spot where even you can
cross.\"

They followed the stream, Sergio on one side, Divino on the other, until
they came to a bend where some large rocks lay in the water forming
stepping-stones. Divino skipped easily across them. \"Someone must have
put them there so little kids can cross too,\" he said. But his brother
laughed and said they must have always been there.

Divino followed Sergio into the dense forest. It was not quite jungle
yet, that started farther north, but it had some jungle characteristics:
tall trees with thick leaves that formed a canopy above them and hanging
vines that monkeys could have swung on. Not much light penetrated the
canopy, so it was several degrees cooler inside. Sergio gathered
kindling wood as he went along and placed it in Divino\'s arms. He was
glad now that his brother had come along, not only to carry the kindling
wood which left him free to carry the heavier pieces, but also to keep
him company. He had never been in such a dark forest before and he might
not have been so confident had he been alone. Divino walked along with
his eyes as wide open as he could get them, taking everything in. He
stumbled frequently because he was looking up and around instead of
where his feet were going.

They had not been walking long when Divino, who we already know has
sharp eyes, spied something strange on their right.

\"Look at that hill,\" he called to Sergio.

\"I don\'t see any hill. Where?\"

Divino pointed and Sergio looked hard until he saw it. \"That\'s not a
hill,\" he said, \"it\'s too low to be a hill.\"

\"What is it then?\"

\"It looks like a mound.\"

\"What\'s a mound?\"

\"Never mind, let\'s go.\"

\"Don\'t you want to see the mound?\" Divino insisted.

\"Well, all right, if you must,\" Sergio replied, \"but only for a
minute. We have to start back before dark or we might get lost.\" He was
curious as well, but didn\'t want to admit it.

They pushed their way through the underbrush until they came to a ring
of white stones surrounding the mound. It couldn\'t have been very old
for it had nothing growing on it and things grow fast in tropical
forests. It was as large as the round room in the kindergarten and twice
as high as Sergio was tall.

Indentations were cut into the side nearest them forming a kind of
staircase. Divino suggested they use them to climb to the top, but
Sergio hesitated.

\"I wonder why this ring of stones is around the mound,\" he said.

\"I don\'t know, but we can easily go over them. Look.\" And before
Sergio could stop him Divino had jumped over the stones and was within
the circle. \"Come on, Sergio, don\'t be afraid.\"

Sergio wasn\'t afraid, he was just being cautious, for he was old enough
to know that it can be dangerous to intrude on things you don\'t
understand, regardless of how enticing they may seem. But he could
hardly let his little brother taunt him with being afraid, so he stepped
into the ring and followed Divino, who was already climbing the mound.

At the top they found two groups of small round stones placed in such a
way that they formed back-to-back seats. Divino, without hesitation, sat
in one of them.

\"This chair is really comfortable, Sergio,\" he said happily. \"Sit in
the other one and you\'ll see.\"

Sergio looked around. The mound was a perfect circle that must have been
carefully made. By whom? Indians? But there weren\'t any Indians left in
that part of the country. Who then? And why?

Divino yawned. \"I could go right to sleep,\" he said. \"Why are you
standing there, Sergio? Sit down.\"

Sergio sat in the vacant seat with his back to his brother. The sun,
filtering through the trees, was low in the west in front of him.
\"Look, Divino, how big and beautiful the sun is.\" Behind him in the
east, hidden by the forest, the full moon had begun to rise.

But Divino was too tired to turn around so he just said, \"Uh-huh.\"
Sergio was feeling drowsy too. \"We better be getting back, Divino.\"
But his brother didn\'t answer. Sergio turned and saw that Divino was
asleep with his head resting on the soft earth that formed a kind of
pillow at the back of his seat. Sergio shook him, but he didn\'t wake
up. Sergio\'s eyelids became so heavy that he decided to rest them for
just a moment before trying to wake Divino again. He closed his eyes and
fell fast asleep.

Continued in the next issue of SCR.

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle: [The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)
