# Tango
                                 
## by Luisa Valenzuela
 
I was told:
                                 
In this dance hall you have to
sit close to the bar, on the left
near the cash register; order a
glass of wine, nothing stronger
because it\'s not becoming for
women, don\'t drink beer because
beer makes you want to piss and
pissing isn\'t for ladies either.
They talk about a kid from this
neighborhood who ditched his
girlfriend when he caught her
leaving the ladies room: I
thought she was pure spirit, a
fairy, it seems the kid said. The
girlfriend was left flat, which
in this neighborhood still has
connotations of loneliness and
spinsterhood, something frowned
upon. For women, that is. So I
was told.
                                 
I\'m alone and during the week I
don\'t care, but Saturdays I like
to be with someone and be held
tight. That\'s why I dance the
tango.
                                 
I learned with much dedication
and effort, in high-heeled shoes
and a tight skirt slit up the
side. Now I go around with the
classic elastic straps in my bag,
equivalent to always having my
racquet with me if I were a
tennis player, but less bother. I
carry the straps in my bag and
sometimes, when waiting on line
at the bank or in front of some
window when they make me wait, I
fondle them, carelessly, without
thinking and maybe, I don\'t
know, I console myself with the
idea that at that very moment I
could be dancing the tango
instead of waiting for some
inconsiderate flunky to attend to
me.
                                 
I know that somewhere in the
city, no matter what time it is,
there will be a salon where
they\'re dancing in the shadows.
You can\'t know whether it\'s
night or day there, nobody cares
whether it\'s night or day, and
the elastics straps can be
wrapped around the instep of your
street shoes, stretched as they
are from so much tramping around
looking for work.
                                 
Saturday nights you\'re looking
for anything except work. So
sitting at a table close to the
bar, as recommended, I wait. The
key spot in this salon is the
bar, I was insistently told, that
way the men can give you the
once-over on their way to the
men\'s room. *They* can allow
themselves that luxury. They push
open the swinging doors bloated
ready to burst, we\'re blasted by
a gust of ammonia, and they come
out much relieved and ready to
dance again.
                                 
I know now when I\'m going to
dance with one of them. And which
one. I detect that very slight
head movement which indicates
that I am the chosen one, I
recognize the invitation and if I
want to accept I smile very
slightly, meaning that I accept
but I don\'t move; he will come
to me, will offer his hand, we
will stand facing each other on
the edge of the dance floor
waiting for the tension to build,
for the sound of the *bandoneon*
to swell until we\'re ready to
explode and then, on some
unforeseen chord, he\'ll put his
arm around my waist and we\'ll
cast off.
                                 
We navigate at full sail if it\'s
a *milonga*, for the tango we
list. And our feet don\'t get
tangled because he\'s wise and
signals the maneuvers by
strumming on my back. If there\'s
some new step or figure I don\'t
know, I improvise and sometimes I
come up smelling like roses. I
let fly a foot, list to
starboard, don\'t separate my
legs more than necessary, he
steps along with elegance and I
follow. At times I stop when his
middle finger lightly touches my
spine. Put yourself in neutral,
woman, the *maestro* had told me
\-- and you should stay frozen in
mid-step so he can do his
gyrations.
                                 
I really learned it, I was
suckled on it, so to speak. All
the posturing by the men that
alludes to something else.
That\'s the tango. And it\'s so
beautiful that you end up
accepting.
                                 
My name is Sandra but in these
places I like to be called Sonia,
so as to endure beyond waking.
Here, however, very few ask or
give names, few speak. Some do
smile to themselves though,
listening to that inner music
they are dancing to and which
isn\'t always a product of
nostalgia. We, the women, also
laugh and smile. I laugh when
they ask me to dance an encore
(and we stand silently, sometimes
smiling, on the dance floor
waiting for the next number), I
laugh because this tango music
oozes out of the floor and
penetrates the soles of our feet
and makes us vibrate and drags us
with it.
                                 
I love it. The tango. And
eventually the man who,
transmitting the keys of the
movements with his fingers,
dances with me.
                                 
I don\'t mind walking the
thirty-odd blocks to get back
home. Some Saturdays I even spend
my bus fare on the *milonga* and
I don\'t care. Some Saturdays a
sound of celestial trumpets runs
through the *bandoneons* and I
elevate. I fly. Some Saturdays
I\'m in my shoes without needing
the elastic straps, they stay on
by themselves. It\'s worth it.
The week passes banally by and I
hear the idiotic street
flirtations, those direct
phrases, so petty when compared
to the obliquity of the tango.
                                 
Here and now, almost glued to the
bar in order to master the view,
I gaze somewhat fixedly at some
handsome mature guys and smile.
They\'re the best dancers. Let\'s
see which one decides to move.
The nod comes from the one on the
left, half hidden behind the
column. A tilting nod so delicate
that he could be trying to listen
to his own shoulder. I like it. I
like the man. I smile openly and
only then does he stand up and
approach. You can\'t expect
reckless haste. No one here would
risk being rejected face to face,
none is prepared to return fuming
to his seat under the mocking
gaze of the others. This one
knows that he has me and he moves
in striding quickly, and I don\'t
like him as much close up with
his years and his air of
indifference.
                                 
The ruling ethics don\'t allow me
to play innocent. I stand up, he
leads me to a somewhat distant
part of the dance floor and there
\-- he speaks to me! And not like
that one a while back who only
spoke to excuse himself for not
answering me, because I come here
to dance and not to chat, he told
me, and that was the last time he
opened his mouth. No. This one is
conversing, and it\'s exciting.
He says do you see, doña, what
the crisis is like, and I say
yes, I see, I damn well do see
although I don\'t say it in those
words, I become refined, I am
Sonia: Sí, señor, how frightful,
I say, but he doesn\'t let me
elaborate the idea because he\'s
already holding me tight, ready
to cast off at the next beat.
This one won\'t let me drown, I
console myself, surrendering,
silenced.
                                 
It turns out to be a tango of
pure concentration, of cosmic
comprehension. I can do the steps
as I saw the one in the crochet
dress do them, the plump lady who
enjoys herself so much, who
wields her shapely calves so well
that one forgets the rest of her
opulent anatomy. I dance thinking
of the plump lady, in her green
crochet dress \-- the color of
hope, they say\--, in the
pleasure she takes in dancing,
replica or maybe a reflection of
the pleasure she must feel while
knitting; a vast dress for her
vast body and the happiness to
dream of the moment when she can
show it off, dancing. I don\'t
knit, nor do I dance as well as
the plump lady, although at this
moment I do, because the miracle
has happened.
                                 
And when the number ends and my
companion comments on the crisis
again, I listen unctuously, I
don\'t answer him, I give him
time to add:
                                 
\"And did you see the prices
they\'re charging for hotel
rooms? I\'m a widower and live
with my two sons. Before I could
invite a lady to a restaurant and
foot the bill and take her later
to a hotel. Now I can only ask a
lady if she has an apartment
downtown. Because a chicken and a
bottle of wine is about the limit
for me.\"
                                 
I remember those flying feet
\--mine\--, the filigreed steps.
I think of the plump lady so
happy with her happy man, I even
sense a sincere vocation for
knitting.
                                 
\"I don\'t have an apartment,\" I
explain, \"but I do have a room
in a well situated *pensión*,
that\'s clean. And I have plates,
knives and forks, and two green
glasses, those tall thin ones.\"
                                 
\"Green? They\'re for white
wine.\"
                                 
\"White, yes.\"
                                 
\"Sorry, but I never touch white
wine.\"
                                 
And we separate without even one
more dance.
                                 
                                 
© Luisa Valenzuela
                                 
This story may not be archived or
reproduced in any way without the
express permission of the author.
                                 
Translation: FTS
                                 
**Luisa Valenzuela** is one of
Argentina\'s foremost writers.
She was born and resides now in
Buenos Aires, after many years
abroad. From 1979 to 1989 she
lived in New York, where she was
Writer in Residence at Columbia
and New York Universities. She
received a Guggenheim scholarship
and was a Fullbright Fellow
(International Writers Workshop),
Iowa. She has published six
novels and eight short story
collections, which have been
translated into various languages
\-- all into English. Her work is
studied in universities in the
United States, England and
Australia. She has just completed
her latest novel, entitled \"La
Travesía\".
