# So It Goes

![](so-it-goes.jpg){class="a" style="max-width:100%"}

### The Passing of the Present and the Decline of America

## By [Andrew Bacevich](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/)

"I asked myself about the present: how wide it was, how deep it was, how
much was mine to keep."\
--- Kurt Vonnegut,
[*Slaughterhouse-Five*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0812988523/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
(1969)

Kurt Vonnegut's famous novel about the World War II bombing of the
German city of Dresden appeared the year I graduated from West Point.
While dimly aware that its publication qualified as a literary event, I
felt no urge to read it. At that moment, I had more immediate priorities
to attend to, chief among them: preparing for my upcoming deployment to
Vietnam.

[]{#anchor}Had I reflected on Vonnegut's question then, my guess is that
I would have judged the present to be both very wide and very deep and,
as a white American male, mine to possess indefinitely. Life, of course,
was by no means perfect. The Vietnam War had obviously not gone exactly
as expected. The cacophonous upheaval known as "the Sixties" had
produced considerable unease and consternation. Yet a majority of
Americans --- especially those with their hands on the levers of
political, corporate, and military power --- saw little reason to doubt
that history remained on its proper course and that was good enough for
me.

In other words, despite the occasional setbacks and disappointments of
the recent past, this country's global preeminence remained
indisputable, not just in theory but in fact. That the United States
would enjoy such a status for the foreseeable future seemed a foregone
conclusion. After all, if any single nation prefigured the destiny of
humankind, it was ours. Among the lessons taught by history itself,
nothing ranked higher or seemed more obvious. Primacy, in other words,
defined our calling. 

Any number of motives, most of them utterly wrong-headed, had prompted
the United States to go to war in Vietnam. Yet, in retrospect, I've come
to believe that one motive took precedence over all others: Washington's
fierce determination to deflect any doubt about this country's status as
history's sole chosen agent. By definition, once U.S. officials had
declared that preserving a non-communist South Vietnam constituted a
vital national security interest, it became one, *ipso facto*. Saying it
made it so, even if, by any rational calculation, the fate of South
Vietnam had negligible implications for the wellbeing of the average
American.

As it happened, the so-called lessons of the Vietnam War were soon
forgotten. Although that conflict ended in humiliating defeat, the
reliance on force to squelch doubts about American dominion persisted.
And once the Cold War ended, taking with it any apparent need for the
United States to exercise self-restraint, the militarization of American
policy reached full flood. Using force became little short of a
compulsion. Affirming American "global leadership" provided an
overarching rationale for the sundry saber-rattling demonstrations,
skirmishes, interventions, bombing campaigns, and large-scale wars in
which U.S. forces have continuously engaged ever since.

Simultaneously, however, that wide, deep, and taken-for-granted present
of my youth was slipping away. As our wars became longer and more
numerous, the problems besetting the nation only multiplied, while the
solutions on offer proved ever flimsier. 

The possibility that a penchant for war might correlate with mounting
evidence of national distress largely escaped notice. This was
especially the case in Washington where establishment elites clung to
the illusion that military might testifies to national greatness.

Somewhere along the way --- perhaps midway between Donald Trump's
election as president in November 2016 and the assault on the Capitol in
January of this year --- it dawned on me that the present that I once
knew and took as a given is now gone for good. A conclusion that I would
have deemed sacrilegious half a century ago now strikes me as
self-evident: The American experiment in dictating the course of history
has reached a dead-end.

How could that have happened over the course of just a few decades? And
where does the demise of that reassuring present --- arrangements that I
and most other Americans once took to be fixed and true --- leave us
today? What comes next?

**Inflection Point**

"[So it goes](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1969/05/17/dresden)."
As Vonnegut recounts the journey of his time-traveling protagonist,
Billy Pilgrim, in *Slaughterhouse-Five, *that terse phrase serves as a
recurring motif. It defines Vonnegut's worldview: fate is arbitrary,
destiny inexplicable, history a random affair. There is no why. Whatever
happens, happens. So it goes. 

Such sentiments are deeply at odds with the way Americans are accustomed
to thinking about past, present, and future. Since the founding of our
republic, if not before, we have habitually imputed to history a clearly
identifiable purpose, usually connected to the spread of freedom and
democracy as we understand those concepts. 

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1250795990/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Yet as crises without easy solutions continue to accumulate, Vonnegut's
cynicism -- tantamount to civic blasphemy --- might warrant fresh
consideration. "So it goes" admits to severe limits on human agency.
While offering little in terms of remedies, it just might offer a first
step toward recovering a collective sense of modesty and
self-awareness. 

Because he's president, Joe Biden must necessarily profess to believe
otherwise. By any objective measure, Biden is a long-in-the-tooth career
politician of [no particular
](https://www.thedp.com/article/2020/11/biden-democracy-penn-justice-democrats-socialists)[distinction](https://www.thedp.com/article/2020/11/biden-democracy-penn-justice-democrats-socialists).
He is clearly a decent and well-meaning fellow. Yet his prior record of
substantive achievement, whether as a long-serving senator from Delaware
or as vice president, is thin. He is the Democratic Party's equivalent
of a B-list movie actor honored with his own
[star](https://walkoffame.com/george-burns/) on the Hollywood Walk of
Fame in tribute to his sheer doggedness and longevity. 

That said, some Americans entertain high hopes for the Biden presidency.
Especially in quarters where Trump Derangement Syndrome remains acute,
expectations of Biden [single-handedly
charting](https://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/can-joe-biden-save-america-inauguration-donald-trump)
a course back from the abyss toward which his predecessor had allowed
the nation to drift are palpable. So, too, is the belief that he will
thereby reconstitute some version of American political, economic, and
military primacy, even in a world of Covid-19, climate change, a rising
China, and a host of other daunting challenges. Despite this very tall
order, "so it goes" can have no place in Biden's lexicon. 

During its decades-long interval of apparent global dominion, American
expectations about the role presidents were to play grew appreciably.
Commentators fell into the habit of referring to the occupant of the
Oval Office as "the most powerful man in the world," presiding over the
planet's most powerful nation. The duties prescribed by the U.S.
Constitution came nowhere near to defining the responsibilities and
prerogatives of the chief executive. Prophet, seer, source of
inspiration, interpreter of the zeitgeist, and war-maker par excellence:
presidents were expected to function as each of these. 

In 1936, Franklin Roosevelt boosted the morale of Depression-era
Americans by assuring them that they had a "[rendezvous with
destiny](https://www.austincc.edu/lpatrick/his2341/fdr36acceptancespeech.htm)."
At the very moment when he entered the White House in 1961, John F.
Kennedy thrilled his countrymen with a [pledge
to](https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc=91&page=transcript)
"pay any price, bear any burden, \[and\] meet any hardship" to prevent
the extinction of liberty itself globally. In his second inaugural
address, delivered in the midst of two protracted wars, George W. Bush
[announced](https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4460172)
to his fellow citizens that "ending tyranny in our world" had become
"the calling of our time." Even today, tyranny shows no signs of
disappearing. Even so --- and notwithstanding four years of Donald Trump
--- the delusion that presidents possess visionary gifts persists. And
so it goes.

As a result, whether he likes it or not --- and he probably likes it
quite a lot --- observers are looking to Biden to demonstrate similarly
prophetic gifts. Even though expressing himself in less than soaring
terms, he's sought to oblige. According to the president, the United
States --- and by implication the world as a whole --- has today arrived
at an "inflection point," a technocratic tagline that's become a
recurring motif for both him and his administration.  

That "[inflection
point](https://www.facebook.com/msnbc/videos/president-elect-biden-we-stand-at-an-inflection-point-we-have-an-opportunity-to-/433868217611192/)"
conveys little by way of poetry in no way diminishes its significance.
Quite the opposite, it expresses Biden's own sense of the historical
moment. Implicit in the phrase is a sense of urgency. Also implicit is a
call to action: "*Here* we are. *There* is where we need to go. Follow
me." Consider it the very inverse of "so it goes."

**Three Vectors**

Given both Biden's advanced age and his party's precarious majority in
Congress, not to mention the legions of Americans hankering to return
Donald Trump to the White House, the opportunity to act on this imagined
inflection point may well prove fleeting at best, nonexistent at worst.
If Republicans gain control of the Senate or House of Representatives
next year, "so it goes" may become the mournful refrain of a lame-duck
presidency. Hence, Biden's understandable determination to seize the
moment, before [rising
inequality](https://www.brookings.edu/research/tackling-the-inequality-pandemic-is-there-a-cure/)
at home, a [rising
China](https://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/insights/27828/how-a-rising-china-has-remade-global-politics)
abroad, [rising
seas](https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-global-sea-level)
everywhere, and a potentially [resurgent
Trumpism](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/53-republicans-view-trump-true-us-president-reutersipsos-2021-05-24/)
swamp his administration.

So even though the Biden team is not yet fully in place, the inflection
point already finds expression in three distinct commitments. Together,
they give us a sense of what to expect from this administration --- and
what we should worry about.

The first commitment bears the imprint of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal.
It assumes that vigorous government action under Washington's benign and
watchful eye can indeed repair a battered and broken economy, restoring
prosperity, while redressing deep inequities. Given the necessary
resources, that government can solve problems, even big ones, has for
more than a century been a central precept of American liberalism. To
demonstrate liberalism's continued viability, Biden proposes to spend
trillions of dollars to "[build back
better](https://www.whitehouse.gov/build-back-better/)," while curbing
the
[excesses](https://prospect.org/politics/take-back-our-party-restoring-the-democratic-legacy/)
of a neoliberalism to which his own party contributed mightily. The
spending and the curbs inevitably elicit charges that Biden has embraced
[socialism or something
worse](https://www.newsweek.com/joe-bidens-systemic-socialism-opinion-1591299).
So it goes in American politics these days. 

The second commitment that derives from Biden's inflection point centers
on the culture wars. Its progressive purpose is to supplant a social
order in which white heterosexual males (like Biden and me) have enjoyed
a privileged place with a new order that [prizes
diversity](https://dib.harvard.edu/). Creating such a new order implies
expunging the non-trivial vestiges of American racism, sexism, and
homophobia. Given trends within late modernity that emphasize autonomy
and choice over tradition and obligation, this effort may eventually
succeed, but rest assured, such success will not come anytime soon. In
the meantime, Biden will catch all kinds of grief from those [professing
to
cherish](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/10/us/politics/military-diversity.html)
a set of received values that ostensibly formed the foundation of the
American Experiment. So it goes.

The third commitment deriving from that inflection point relates to
America's once-and-future role in the world. Suffused with nostalgia,
this commitment seeks to return the planet to the heyday of American
dominion, putting the United States once more in history's driver's
seat. Reduced to a Bidenesque bumper sticker, it insists that "[America
is
back](https://apnews.com/article/biden-foreign-policy-g7-summit-munich-cc10859afd0f542fd268c0a7ddcd9bb6)."
With decades of foreign policy experience to draw on, the president
appears committed to making good on that assertion. 

His much ballyhooed first trip abroad put this aspiration on vivid
display, while also revealing its remarkable hollowness. As a start,
Biden and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson issued a [vapid
revision](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/06/10/the-new-atlantic-charter/)
of the 1941 Atlantic Charter, in essence posing as ersatz versions of
Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill. Few who witnessed the
[charade](https://www.rt.com/op-ed/526247-atlantic-charter-biden-johnson/)
were fooled. 

Then Air Force One delivered the president to Brussels where he cajoled
the members of NATO into tagging China as a looming threat. Doing so
meant ignoring the [ignominious
failure](https://www.9news.com.au/world/afghanistan-war-as-us-nato-and-australian-troops-withdraw-hamid-karzai-says-mission-a-failure/c73d8d93-cabb-4d6f-bd86-f3682670f28a)
of NATO's mission in Afghanistan and disregarding French President
Emmanuel Macron's
[reminder](https://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/trend-lines/29737/biden-s-trip-cements-the-shift-in-china-europe-relations)
that "NATO is an organization that concerns the North Atlantic," whereas
China just happens to be located on the other side of the world. 

The *pièce de* *résistance* came when Biden and Russian President
Vladimir Putin held a nearly
[substance-free](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2021/06/18/the-biden-putin-summit-how-bad-is-normal/)
"summit" in Geneva. Possessing neither the drama of Kennedy vs. Nikita
Khrushchev in 1961, nor the substance of Ronald Reagan's encounter with
Mikhail Gorbachev in 1985, it proved an empty show, even if it did play
to a full theater.

Still, the entire trip and the bloated media coverage it generated were
instructive. They illuminated what Biden's inflection point truly
signifies for America's role in the world. The Biden administration
yearns to reinstall familiar verities dating from World War II and the
Cold War as the basis of U.S. policy. Many members of the press corps
share that yearning. Hence the inclination to define the present age in
terms of a new Cold War version of great-power competition, while paying
little more than lip service to the need for fresh thinking and vigorous
action on matters like climate change, environmental degradation,
refugee flows, and nuclear proliferation.

Modeled at least in part on a New Deal that Americans remember fondly
but inaccurately, Biden's economic policies will in all likelihood
promote growth and reduce unemployment. Even taking into account the
risk of unintended consequences such as inflation, the effort is
probably worth undertaking. 

By wading into the culture wars, Biden might also bring the country
closer to fulfilling the aspirations expressed in the Declaration of
Independence and the Constitution. No doubt arguments about the proper
meaning of freedom and equality will continue. But the correct goal is
not utopia. Merely reducing the gap between professed ideals and
prevailing practice will suffice. Here, too, the effort is at least
worth undertaking.

When it comes to America's role in the world, however, it becomes
difficult to profess even modest optimism. If Biden clings to a
calcified and militarized conception of national security --- as he
appears intent on doing --- he will put his entire presidency at risk.
Rather than restoring American primacy, he will accelerate American
decline. 

Harkening back to where the nation was when I received my commission in
1969, I'm struck today by how little we Americans learned from our
Vietnam misadventure. Pain did not translate into wisdom. That we have
learned even less from our various armed conflicts since appears only
too obvious. When it comes to war, Americans remain willfully and
incorrigibly ignorant. We have paid dearly for that ignorance and will
likely pay even more in the years ahead. So it goes.

Copyright 2021 Andrew Bacevich

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [Andrew Bacevich](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/)

**Andrew Bacevich**,
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/is-there-a-doctor-in-the-house/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/is-there-a-doctor-in-the-house/),
is president of the [Quincy Institute for Responsible
Statecraft](https://quincyinst.org/). His new book, [*After the
Apocalypse:  America's Role in a World
Transformed*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1250795990/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
has just been published.

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/)

Thanks to \<a href ="https//tomdispatch.com"\>TomDispatch.com\</a\>
where this article first appeared -- without the image.
