# Book Review
![](coronavirus-book-cover.jpg){class="a"}
## by Paula Cappa


### The Coronavirus Pandemic - Anthroposophical Perspectives\ 
by Judith von Halle - translated by Frank Thomas Smith

Author Judith Von Halle writes an impressive and brave perspective on
why the Coronavirus pandemic is happening to us at this time. She
addresses the psychological aspects but focuses mostly on spiritual
knowledge, spiritual reality, and "spiritual-science." The term
spiritual-science drew my curiosity. This 100-page book is a monograph
that I would often pause in the reading so I could reflect on the
somewhat radical ideas. Some readers will find certain insights a bridge
too far, as I did at times, but most of it makes convincing sense and
offers the reader a unique understanding of Covid-19. Haven't we all
asked, "Why is this happening now? What is really going on here with all
this sickness, death, and widespread contagion?" Speculative answers
abound out there, but Von Halle points to the world's present
"disposition" as one of the causes. You will find a good deal of
Austrian scientist and visionary Rudolf Steiner's philosophy here.
Steiner's "anthroposophy" is defined a creative educational system that
aims to optimize physical and mental well-being. Much of von Halle's
book reflects this spiritual-scientific research.

Judith Von Halle asks, "What entities stand behind the virus and why is
it affecting humans? What measures can we take to prevent it? Most
importantly, what does this crisis mean to individuals and the world
community?" She answers all of these beginning with "There is the
individual karma, the karma of a people, and the karma of humanity. In
the case of Covid-19 all three are undeniably involved." Von Halle
instructs that because this is a pandemic event, the karma of humanity
is at stake.

"What are the spiritual causes for the origins of the pandemic?"
According to Von Halle's research, the cause is "materialism, which has
spread out over the entire earth, ---and especially in humanity's
predominantly materialistic way of thinking."

She explains this mindset: "Humanity as such has developed a
'disposition' for illness by this virus in that it has promoted and
cherished materialism in its thinking for the past 150 years .... Today
mankind is trapped within a degenerate development, because it does not
accept and nurture spiritual life with sufficient dedication." The
historical perspective on this is fascinating, from Europe's recent
"march of materialism" to back in time to other widespread infections
like leprosy, cholera, typhus, anthrax, smallpox, tuberculosis, and the
Spanish flu in 1918.

For Covid-19, she includes a description of the medical symptoms and
their psychological components (the infection causing rigidity of the
lungs that fail to absorb oxygen, which aligns with the fixed and
obsessive materialistic thinking). The breathing apparatus grows stiff
when "a life of free thinking is no longer possible."

The second half of the book moves on to the fears and psychological
aspects of the pandemic regarding social separation and isolation. She
follows this with simple soul exercises targeting "*the true, the
beautiful, and the good*." Such prayerful thoughts were wonderfully
comforting and inspiring for me.

At the end, the question arises, will we be victorious spirits in our
world? Or will more pandemics occur to provide another opportunity to
focus on our spirituality and develop our souls to achieve in our hearts
"the true, the beautiful, and the good." What is abundantly clear is
that if you or family members are struggling with the effects of
coronavirus, these 109 pages might bring meaning and purpose to your
healing. If you are healthy and stable, this book can shatter the old
destructive beliefs and shine a bright light into your life's purpose in
the world. Even if you disagree entirely with von Halle's perspectives
and research, you will take away a deeper sense of yourself to your
fellow man and the unifying elements of life on this planet. Most of her
writing is heartfelt and intelligent and will undoubtedly provoke
positive thoughts into the narrowest of minds about consciousness,
self-knowledge, and soul development. The world soul may very well be on
a path to spiritual rebirth. Highly recommended.

*Paula Cappa* is an avid book reviewer and an award-winning author of
novels and short stories.

[The Coronavirus Pandemic is available from Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/s?k=judith+von+halle&i=stripbooks-intl-ship&crid=26UYD0XS0X9GU&sprefix=judith+%2Cstripbooks-intl-ship%2C652&ref=nb_sb_ss_ts-doa-p_7_7)
