# My Life with Maus

![](maus-cover.jpg)

## By Tom Engelhardt

Sometimes life has a way of making you realize things about yourself.
Recently, I discovered that an urge of mine, almost four decades old,
had been the very opposite of that of a rural Tennessee school board
this January. In another life, I played a role in what could be thought
of as the unbanning of the graphic novel *Maus*.

For months, I've been reading about the growing Trumpist-Republican
movement to ban whatever books its members consider politically
unpalatable, lest the lives of America's children be sullied by, say, a
novel of Toni Morrison's like [*The Bluest
Eye*](https://www.stltoday.com/news/local/education/wentzville-school-board-bans-acclaimed-novel-from-high-school-libraries-over-obscenity-complaints/article_0aeb99be-466e-5423-b313-25c6556f7157.html)
or Margaret Atwood's [*The Handmaid's
Tale*](https://www.kmuw.org/education/2021-11-09/goddard-school-district-orders-29-books-removed-from-circulation)
or a history book like [*They Called Themselves the
K.K.K.*](https://www.usnews.com/news/best-states/kansas/articles/2021-11-10/kansas-district-orders-29-books-removed-from-circulation)
It's an urge that just rubs me the wrong way. After all, as a boy
growing up in New York City in the 1950s, when children's post-school
lives were much less organized than they are today, I would often wander
into the local branch of the public library, hoping the librarian would
allow me into the adult section. There --- having little idea what I was
doing --- I would pull interesting-looking grown-up books off the
shelves and head for home.

Years later, exchanging childhood memories with a friend and
publishing colleague, Sara Bershtel, I discovered that, on arriving in
this country, she, too, had found a sympathetic librarian and headed for
those adult shelves. At perhaps 12 or 13, just about the age of those
Tennessee schoolkids, we had both --- miracle of miracles! --- not
faintly knowing what we were doing, pulled Annmarie Selinko's
[bestselling
novel](https://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/18/books/review/InsideList-t.html)

*Désirée* off the shelves. It was about Napoleon Bonaparte and his
youthful fiancé and we each remember being riveted by it. Maybe my own
fascination with history, and hers with French literature, began there.
Neither of us, I suspect, were harmed by reading the sort of racy
bestseller that Republicans would today undoubtedly loathe.

<a target="_blank" href="https://www.amazon.com/dp/0679406417/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20"><div class="polaroid"><img class="b" src="maus-cover.jpg" alt="Maus book cover" style="width:100%"><div class="container"><p>Buy the Book!</p></div></div></a>

Oh, and if you'll excuse a little stream of consciousness here, my
friend Sara was born in a German displaced-persons camp to Jewish
parents who had, miraculously enough, survived the Nazi death camps at
Auschwitz and Buchenwald, which brings me back to the jumping-off spot
for this piece. Unless you've been in Ukraine these last weeks, it's
something you undoubtedly already know about, given the attention it's
received: that, by a 10-0 vote, a school board in McMinn, Tennessee,
[banned](https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2022/01/27/maus-ban-tennessee-mcminn-county-holocaust/)
from its eighth-grade classroom curriculum Art Spiegelman's Pulitzer
Prize-winning graphic novel
[*Maus*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0679406417/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
about his parents' Holocaust years in Auschwitz and beyond (and his own
experience growing up with them afterward). When I first heard about
that act I felt, however briefly and indirectly, pulled off the shelves
myself and banned. And
[*damn!*](https://www.thedailybeast.com/tennessee-school-bans-art-spiegelmans-pulitzer-prize-winning-graphic-novel-maus)
--- yes, I want to make sure that this piece gets banned as well! --- I
felt proud of it!

Just to back up for a moment: that Tennessee school board banned
Spiegelman's book on the grounds, at least nominally, that it contained
[naked cartoon
mice](https://www.comicsbeat.com/outcry-after-tennessee-school-board-unanimously-votes-to-ban-maus/)
--- Jewish victims in a concentration camp and Spiegelman's mother, who
committed suicide, in a bathtub --- and profanity as well (like that
word "damn!"). In a world where, given a chance, so many of us would
head for the modern equivalent of those adult library shelves --- these
days, of course, any kid with an iPhone or a computer can get a dose of
almost any strange thing on this planet --- that school board might as
well have been a marketing firm working for *Maus*. After all, more than
three decades after it first hit the bestseller lists, their action sent
it soaring to [number
one](https://thehill.com/changing-america/enrichment/arts-culture/592121-maus-rises-to-top-of-amazons-bestseller-list-after)
at Amazon, while [donated
copies](https://www.npr.org/2022/01/31/1076970866/maus-banned-tennessee-school-board?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Lit%20Hub%20Daily:%20February%201%2C%202022&utm_term=lithub_master_list)
began to pour into rural Tennessee.

As former Secretary of Labor Robert Reich [recently pointed
out](https://www.rsn.org/001/how-to-get-teenagers-to-read-important-books-ban-them.html),
if you truly want a teenager to read any book with gusto, the first
thing you need to do is, of course, ban it. So, I suppose that, in its
own upside-down way, the McMinn board did our world a strange kind of
favor. In the long run, however, the growing rage for banning books from
schools and
[libraries](https://www.upi.com/Top_News/US/2021/12/20/Texas-schools-book-ban-libraries/7611640004900/)
(or even, in the case of the [Harry
Potter](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/feb/04/book-burning-harry-potter-twilight-us-pastor-tennessee)
books, burning them,
[Nazi-style](https://www.ushmm.org/learn/timeline-of-events/1933-1938/book-burning))
doesn't offer a particularly hopeful vision of where this country's
headed right now.

**"What's So Funny?**"

Still, as I'm sure you've guessed, I'm only going on like this because
that incident in Tennessee and the media response to it brought back an
ancient moment in my own life. So, think of the rest of this piece as a
personal footnote to the McMinn story and to the growing wave of book
bannings in courses and school libraries across too much of this
country. And that's not even to mention the plethora of ["gag order"
bills](https://pen.org/steep-rise-gag-orders-many-sloppily-drafted/)
passed by or still being considered in Republican-dominated state
legislatures to prevent the teaching of certain subjects. It's further
evidence, if you need it, of an urge to wipe from consciousness so much
that they find uncomfortable in our national past. It's also undoubtedly
part of a larger urge to take over America's public-school system, or
even [replace
it](https://www.thenation.com/article/culture/spiegelman-maus-banned-survivors/),
much as Donald Trump and crew would like to all-too-autocratically take
over this country and transform it into an unrecognizable polity, a
subject *TomDispatch* has covered for years.

However, my moment in the sun began at a time when The Donald was about
to open the first of his Atlantic City casinos that would eventually
turn him into a [notorious
bankuptee](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/nyregion/donald-trump-atlantic-city.html).
And it took place inside the world of publishing, which then seemed all
too ready to essentially ban *Maus* from this planet. Back in the early
1980s, putting out a Holocaust "comic book" --- though the term "graphic
novel"
[existed](https://www.thenation.com/article/culture/spiegelman-maus-banned-survivors/),
just about no one in publishing knew it --- in which Jews were cartoon
mice and the Nazis cats, seemed like a suicidal act for a book
publisher.

And in that context, here's my personal story about the cartoon mice
that might never have made it to McMinn County, Tennessee. In the 1980s,
I was an editor at Pantheon Books, a publishing house run by André
Schiffrin who, in a fashion hardly commonplace then or later, gave his
editors a chance to sign up books that might seem too unfashionable or
politically dangerous.

One day, our wonderful art director, Louise Fili, came to my office.
(She worked on another floor of the Random House building in New York
City, the larger publishing house of which we were then a part.) In her
hands, she had an oversized magazine called *RAW* that I had never seen
before, put out by a friend of hers named Art Spiegelman. It was filled
with experimental cartoon art. And in the seams of new issues, he had
been stapling tiny chapters of a memoir he was beginning to create about
the experiences of his father and mother in the Holocaust. Jews from
Poland, they had ended up in Auschwitz and managed, unlike so many
millions of Jews murdered in such death camps, to survive the
experience. Louise also had with her a proposal from Spiegelman for what
would become his bestselling graphic novel *Maus*.

I still remember her telling me that it had already been rejected by
every publisher imaginable. In those days, that was, I suspect,
something like a selling point for me. Anyway, I took the couple of
teeny chapters and the proposal home --- and all these years later, I
still recall the moment when I decided I had to put Spiegelman's book
out, no matter what. I remember it because I thought of myself as a
rather rational editor and the feeling that I simply had to do *Maus*
was one of the two least rational decisions I ever made in publishing
(the other
[being](https://tomdispatch.com/chalmers-johnson-portrait-of-a-sagging-empire/)
to do Chalmers Johnson's book *Blowback*, also a future bestseller).

At that moment, I doubt I had ever read what came to be known as a
graphic novel, but there was something in my background that, I suspect,
left me particularly open to it. My mother, [Irma
Selz](https://tomdispatch.com/engelhardt-a-message-in-a-bottle-from-my-mother/),
had been a theatrical and later political caricaturist for New York's
leading newspapers and magazines (and, in the 1950s, the *New Yorker* as
well). She was, in fact, known as "New York's girl caricaturist" in the
gossip columns of her time, since she was the only one in an otherwise
largely male world of cartoonists.

Because she lived in that world, after a fashion I did, too. I can, for
instance, remember [Irwin
Hazen](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/16/arts/irwin-hasen-comic-book-artist-and-dondi-illustrator-dies-at-96.html),
the creator of the now largely forgotten cartoon
[*Dondi*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dondi), sitting by my bedside
when I was perhaps seven or eight drawing his character for me on sheets
of tracing paper before I went to sleep. (Somewhere in the top of my
closet, I suspect I still have those sketches of his!) So I think I was,
in some unexpected way, the perfect editor for Spiegelman's proposal. I
was also a Jew and, though my grandfather had come to America in the
1890s from Lemberg (now Ukraine's Lviv) and later brought significant
parts of his family here, I remember my grandmother telling me of family
members who had been swallowed up by the Holocaust.

Anyway, here's the moment I still recall. I was lying down reading what
Louise had given me when my wife, Nancy, walked past me. At that moment,
I burst out laughing. "What's so funny?" she asked. Her question took me
completely aback. I paused for a genuinely painful moment and then said,
haltingly and in an only faintly coherent fashion, something like:
"Uh... it's a proposed comic book about a guy whose parents lived
through Auschwitz and later, in his adolescence, his mother committed
suicide..."

I felt abashed and yet I *had* been laughing and that stopped me dead in
my tracks. At that very moment, I realized, however irrationally, that
whatever this strange, engrossing, disturbing comic book about a world
from hell turned out to be, I just *had* to do it. From that moment on,
whether it ever sold a copy or not wasn't even an issue for me.

**A Holocaust Comic Book?**

And then, you might say, the problems began. I went to André, told him
about the project, and he reacted expectably. Who in the world, he
wondered, would buy a Holocaust comic book? I certainly didn't know, nor
did I even care then. In some gut way, I simply knew that a world
without this book would be a lesser place. It was that simple.

Thank heavens, as a boss, André deeply believed in his editors, just as
we editors believed in each other. He also hated to say "no." So,
instead, a kind of siege ensued while the proposed book passed from hand
to hand and others looked and reacted, but I remained determined and
knew that, in the end, if I was that way, he would let me do it, as
indeed he did.

I was considered something of a fierce editor in those days and yet I
doubt I touched a word of Spiegelman's manuscript. What it is today, it
is thanks purely to him, not me. I took him out to lunch to tell him
about our publication decision and prepare the way for our future
collaboration. While there, I assured him that I knew nothing about
producing such a book --- he, for instance, wanted the kind of flaps
that were found on French but not American paperbacks --- and would
simply do what he wanted. The one thing I wanted him to know, though,
was that he shouldn't get his hopes up. Given the subject matter, it was
unlikely to sell many copies. (A [Pulitzer
Prize](https://www.pulitzer.org/winners/art-spiegelman)? It never
crossed my mind.)

Fortunately, as far as I could tell, he all too sagely paid no attention
whatsoever to me on the subject. And as it happened, some months later
(as best I remember), the *New York Times Book Review* devoted a full
page to him and, in part, to the future *Maus*. It was like a miracle.
We were stunned and, from that moment on, knew that we had something big
on our hands.

And in that fashion, in another century, you could say that I unbanned
*Maus*, preparing the way for McMinn County to ban it in our own
Trumpist moment. I couldn't be prouder today to have had a hand in
producing the book that caricaturist David Levine would all too aptly
compare to the work of Franz Kafka.

In its continuing eventful existence, as a unique record of the truly
terrible things we humans are capable of doing to one another, it is
indeed a masterpiece. It raises issues that all of us, parents and
children, should have to grapple with on our [endangered
planet](https://tomdispatch.com/what-will-we-remember-of-2022/), a place
where we have so much work ahead of us if, in some terrible fashion, we
don't want to ban ourselves.


Copyright 2022 Tom Engelhardt

*Follow ***TomDispatch*** on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[*TomDispatch.com*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He is also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [*The
End of Victory
Culture*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth and latest book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*
