# Letters to the Editor

RE: [Chess and Cheese in Crete](href="https://southerncrossreview.org/142/daughter-sun-and-others.html)

This beautiful package of poems touched my mind, which has been dull.  I
will read this poetry often.  Hope my mind remembers!\
Lovely Light,\
Anna in Jemez


RE: [Donald Also Rises? - The Far Right Continues to Build Its International](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/feffer-the-donald.html)

Dear Mary Dugan:

Thank you for your [recent
letter](href://="https://southerncrossreview.org/142/dugan-feffer.html) to the Southern Cross Review about my article about Donald
Trump, which was forwarded to me by the editor. I am happy to hear about
your work in the 1980s on behalf of Nicaragua. I, too, was thrilled when
the Sandinistas ousted Somoza and I was very supportive of the
Sandinista social programs in the 1980s.

And that is precisely why I feel it is so important to call out Daniel
Ortega right now and voice my support for all the Sandinistas that he
has thrown in jail or forced into exile. These include his former Vice
President Sergio Ramirez who fled to Spain after the government tried to
arrest him. Those who were not so lucky and are now in prison include
former Sandinistas Hugo Torres, who freed Ortega from prison back in
1974, and Dora Tellez, who as health minister set up the health programs
that you and I so admired in the 1980s.

Ortega broke with his former colleagues to make alliances with
right-wing politicians, powerful business interests, and the Catholic
Church. At this point, he governs from the far right, not the left. I
would recommend that you read [this article
](https://nacla.org/ortega-elections-sandinistas-fsln)in NACLA, which
has long been a reliable left-wing publication covering developments in
Latin America.

If you care about Nicaragua and preserving the real legacy of the
Sandinistas, I would urge you to take a fresh look at what Daniel Ortega
is doing in Nicaragua.

\"Vulgar and vicious\" is actually an understatement when looking at how
he has unraveled the Sandinista programs in order to serve his own
thirst for power.

all the best,

John

\--

John Feffer

Director, Foreign Policy In Focus

Institute for Policy Studies

[www.fpif.org](http://www.fpif.org/)

[www.johnfeffer.com](https://usmail.soros.org/owa/redir.aspx?C=5e39ea53ff48415e93e52c1603b8ce5f&URL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.johnfeffer.com)

\*

RE: [Spiritual Scientific Cosmology](https://southerncrossreview.org/142/steiner-cosmology.html)

Thank you for this wonderful introduction. I think it is so necessary to
be very clear, as you have done superbly well, about how we have arrived
today with our not-knowing. Or rather how we have arrived with the side
of knowledge which is different from ancient sources, and of equal value
to \'science\'. It is difficult for most of us mere mortals to be able
to distinguish between the personal, singular lower intellectual mind,
and the fully integrated intellect of the higher mind guided by the
Masters.

Gratefully, Therese Osborne


RE: [Historia de la Antroposofía en Argentina](southerncrossreview.org/142/historia-antroposofica-argentina.html)

Que bueno!! Me agrado poder leer sobre el origen de la antroposofia en
la argentina, con sus luces y sombras! Yo me acercó a la antroposofia
allá x 1994, desde la medicina, y hoy sigo ese camino humildemente a
500km de Buenos Aires. Gracias!

Beatriz

Hola.  Gracias por el texto.  Excelente.

Quiero comentarte algo.  La casa escuela de Xul Solar también fue de
alguna manera una Rama de la Antroposofía (Schneider le decía la Rama
Argentina.) Xul Solar asistió a conferencias dictadas en Alemania por
Rudolf Steiner y en su biblioteca tenía muchísimos libros de RS en
alemán y francés.  Su  casa taller era un lugar de encuentro de
artistas, poetas y escritores y XS les enseñaba las conferencias de
Steiner. A su casa asistieron grandes escritores como Jorge Luis Borges
y Leopoldo Marechal entre otros. Borges nombra a Steiner en un texto y
Marechal en Adán Buenosayres describe entre otras cosas \"la batalla de
los ángeles\" enseñada por Xul. Borges y Xul Solar también asistieron a
la Rama de Florida en la que es hoy el colegio Rudolf Steiner y además
Borges se reunía con el Sacerdote de la Comunidad de Cristianos y le
explicaba el concepto antroposófico. (Hay varias anécdotas de todo
esto).

Xul Solar pintó un retrato grafía de Rudolf Steiner que se exhibió en la
Exposición los Pizarrones de Rudolf Steiner en el Museo Nacional de
Bellas Artes (2000) y esta imagen también lo utilizó el Goetheanum para
su almanaque del año 2000.

Abrazo enorme ,

Cecilia Bendiger

![Retrato gráficao de Rudolf Steiner](steiner-retrato.jpg){class="alarge"}



Hi Frank, 

*And they cried with a loud voice, saying, "How long, O Lord*  \[Rev 610\] before you finish translating Judith von Halle\'s *Pandemic 2*?

Edward Shook

Ward, Colorado

Hi Edward,

I\'ll be finished in a week or two, but then it will take some months
before it\'s actually published.

Frank

