# The King of the Elves

![An old-school Chevrolet Camaro sitting in a gas staion by the road on a rainy day](rain-gas.jpg)

## by Philip K. Dick

It was raining and getting dark. Sheets of water blew along the
row of pumps at the edge of the filling station; the tree across
the highway bent against the wind.

Shadrach Jones stood just inside the doorway of the little
building, leaning against an oil drum. The door was open and
gusts of rain blew in onto the wood floor. It was late; the sun
had set, and the air was turning cold. Shadrach reached into his
coat and brought out a cigar. He bit the end off it and lit it
carefully, turning away from the door. In the gloom, the cigar
burst into life, warm and glowing. Shadrach took a deep draw. He
buttoned his coat around him and stepped out onto the pavement

\"Darn,\" he said. \"What a night!\" Rain buffeted him, wind
blew at him. He looked up and down the highway, squinting. There
were no cars in sight. He shook his head, locked up the gasoline
pumps.

He went back into the building and pulled the door shut behind
him. He opened the cash register and counted the money he\'d
taken in during the day. It was not much.

Not much, but enough for one old man. Enough to buy him tobacco
and firewood and magazines, so that he could be comfortable as
he waited for the occasional cars to come by. Not very many cars
came along the highway anymore. The highway had begun to fall
into disrepair; there were many cracks in its dry, rough
surface, and most cars preferred to take the big state highway
that ran beyond the hills. There was nothing in Derryville to
attract them, to make them turn toward it. Derryville was a
small town, too small to bring in any of the major industries,
too small to be very important to anyone. Sometimes hours went
by without--- Shadrach tensed. His fingers closed over the
money. From outside came a sound, the metallic ring of the
signal wire stretched along the pavement. *Dinggg!*

Shadrach dropped the money into the till and pushed the drawer
closed. He stood up slowly and walked toward the door,
listening. At the door, he snapped off the light and waited in
the darkness, staring out.

He could see no car there. The rain was pouring down, swirling
with the wind; clouds of mist moved along the road. And
something was standing beside the pumps.

He opened the door and stepped out. At first, his eyes could
make nothing out. Then the old man swallowed uneasily.

Two tiny figures stood in the rain, holding a kind of platform
between them. Once, they might have been gaily dressed in bright
garments, but now their clothes hung limp and sodden, dripping
in the rain. They glanced halfheartedly at Shadrach. Water
streaked their tiny faces, great drops of water. Their robes
blew about them with the wind, lashing and swirling.

On the platform, something stirred. A small head turned wearily,
peering at Shadrach. In the dim light, a rain-streaked helmet
glinted dully.

\"Who are you?\" Shadrach said.

The figure on the platform raised itself up. I'm the King of the
Elves and I\'m wet.\"

Shadrach stared in astonishment.

\"That's right,\" one of the bearers said. \"We\'re all wet.\"

A small group of Elves came straggling up, gathering around
their king. They huddled together forlornly, silently.

\"The King of the Elves,\" Shadrach repeated. \"Well, I'll be
darned.\"

Could it be true? They were very small, all right, and their
dripping clothes were strange and oddly colored.

But *Elves?*

\"I'll be darned. Well, whatever you are, you shouldn\'t be out
on a night like this.\"

\"Of course not,\" the king murmured. \"No fault of our own. No
fault . . .\" His voice trailed off into a choking cough. The
Elf soldiers peered anxiously at the platform.

\"Maybe you better bring him inside,\" Shadrach said. \"My place
is up the road. [He shouldn\'t be out in the
rain.\"]{lang="es-ES"}

\"Do you think we like being out on a night like this?\" one of
the bearers muttered. \"Which way is it? Direct us.\"

Shadrach pointed up the road. \"Over there. Just follow me. I'll
get a fire going.\"

He went down the road, feeling his way onto the first of the
flat stone steps that he and Phineas Judd had laid during the
summer. At the top of the steps, he looked back. The platform
was coming slowly along, swaying a little from side to side.
Behind it, the Elf soldiers picked their way, a tiny column of
silent dripping creatures, unhappy and cold.

\"I'll get the fire started,\" Shadrach said. He hurried them
into the house.

Wearily, the Elf King lay back against the pillow. After sipping
hot chocolate, he had relaxed and his heavy breathing sounded
suspicíously like a snore.

Shadrach shifted in discomfort.

^"^I\'m sorry\" the Elf King said suddenly, opening his eyes. He
rubbed his forehead. \"I must have drifted off. Where was I?\"

\"You should retire, Your Majesty,\" one of the soldiers said
sleepily. \"It is late and these are hard times.\"

\"True,\" the Elf King said, nodding. \"Very true.\" He looked
up at the towering figure of Shadrach, standing before the
fireplace, a glass of beer in his hand. \"Mortal, we thank you
for your hospitality. Normally, we do not impose on human
beings.\"

\"It\'s those Trolls,\" another of the soldiers said, curled up
on a cushion of the couch.

\"Right,\" another soldier agreed. He sat up, groping for his
sword. \"Those reeking Trolls, digging and croaking---\"

\"You see,\" the Elf King went on, \"as our party was crossing
from the Great Low Steps toward the Castle, where it lies in the
hollow of the Tower­ing Mountains---\"

\"You mean Sugar Ridge,\" Shadrach supplied helpfully.

\"The Towering Mountains. Slowly we made our way. A rainstorm
came up. We became confused. All at once a group of Trolls
appeared, crashing through the underbrush. We left the woods and
sought safety on the Endless Path --- \"

"The highway. Route Twenty.\"

^"^So that is why we\'re here.\" The Elf Kíng paused a moment.
\"Harder and harder it rained. The wind blew around us, cold and
bitter. for an endless time we toiled along. We had no idea
where we were going or what would become of us.\"

The Elf King looked up at Shadrach. \"We knew only this: Behind
us, the Trolls were coming, creeping through the woods, marching
through the rain, crushing everything before them.\"

He put his hand to his mouth and coughed, bending forward. All
the Elves waited anxiously until he was done. He straightened
up.

\"It was kind of you to allow us to come inside. We will not
trouble you for long. It is not the custom of the Elves--- \"

Again he coughed, covering his face with his hand. The Elves
drew toward him apprehensively. At last the king stirred. He
sighed.

\'\"What\'s the matter?\" Shadrach asked. He went over and took
the cup of chocolate from the fragile hand. The Elf King lay
back, his eyes shut.

\"He has to rest,\" one of the soldiers said. \"Where\'s your
room? The sleeping room.\"

\"Upstairs,\" Shadrach said. \'I'll show you where.\"

\

      Late that night, Shadrach sat by himself in the dark,
deserted living room, deep in meditation. The Elves were asleep
above him, upstairs in the bedroom, the Elf King in the bed, the
others curled up together on the rug. The house was silent.
Outside, the rain poured down endlessly, blowing against the
house. Shadrach could hear the tree branches slapping in the
wind. He clasped and unclasped his hands. What a strange
business it was---all these Elves, with their old, sick king,
their piping voices. How anxious and peevish they were!

But pathetic, too; so small and wet, with water dripping down
from them, and all their gay robes limp and soggy.

The Trolls---what were they like? Unpleasant and not very clean.
Something about digging, breaking, and pushing through the woods
\...

Suddenly, Shadrach laughed in embarrassment. What was the matter
with him, believing all this? He put his cigar out angrily, his
ears red. What was going on? What kind of joke was this?

Elves? Shadrach grunted in indignation. Elves in Derryville? In
the middle of Colorado? Maybe there were Elves in Europe. Maybe
in Ireland. He had heard of that. But here? Upstairs in his own
house, sleeping in his own bed?

\'I\'ve heard just about enough of this,\" he said. "I'm not an
idiot, you know.\"

He turned toward the stairs, feeling for the banister in the
gloom. He began to climb.

Above him, a light went on abruptly. A door opened.

Two Elves came slowly out onto the landing. They looked down at
him. Shadrach halted halfway up the stairs. Something on their
faces made him stop.

\"What's the matter?\" he asked hesitantly.

They did not answer. The house was turning cold, cold and dark,
with the chill of the rain outside and the chill of the unknown
inside.

\"What is it?\" he said again. \"What's the matter?\"

\"The King is dead,\" one of the Elves said. \"He died a few
moments ago.\"

Shadrach stared up, wide-eyed. \"He did? But----\"

\"He was very cold and very tired.\" The Elves turned away,
going back into the room, slowly and quietly shutting the door.

Shadrach stood, his fingers on the banister, hard, lean fingers,
strong and thin.

He nodded his head blankly.

\"I see,\" he said to the closed door. \"He\'s dead.\"

\

       The Elf soldiers stood around him in a solemn circle. The
living room was bright with sunlight, the cold white glare of
early morning.

\"But wait,\" Shadrach said. He plucked at his necktie. \"I have
to get to the filling station. Can\'t you talk to me when I come
home?\"

The faces of the Elf soldiers were serious and concerned.

\"Listen,\" one of them said. \"Please hear us out. It is very
important to us.\"

Shadrach looked past them. Through the window he saw the
highway, steaming in the heat of day, and down a little way was
the gas station, glittering brightly. And even as he watched, a
car came up to it and honked faintly, impatiently. When nobody
came out of the station, the car drove off again down the road.

\"We beg you," a soldier said.

Shadrach looked down at the ring around him, the anxious faces,
scored with concern and trouble. Strangely, he had always
thought of Elves as carefree beings, flitting without worry or
sense ---

\"Go ahead,\" he said. "I'm listening.\" He went over to the big
chair and sat down. The Elves came up around him. They conversed
among themselves for a moment, whispering, murmuring distantly.
Then they turned toward Shadrach.

The old man waited, his arms folded.

\"We cannot be without a king,\" one of the soldiers said. \"We
could not survive. Not these days.\"

\"The Trolls \" another added. \"They multiply very fast. They
are terrible beasts. They\'re heavy and ponderous, crude,
bad-smelling --- \"

\"The odor of them is awful. They come up from the dark wet
places, under the earth, where the blind, groping plants feed in
silence, far below the surface, far from the sun.\"

\"Well, you ought to elect a king, then,\" Shadrach suggested.
\"I don\'t see any problem there.\"

\"We do not elect the King of the Elves,\" a soldier said. \"The
old king must name his successor.\"

\"Oh,\" Shadrach replied. \"Well, there\'s nothing wrong with
that method.\"

\"As our old king lay dying, a few distant words came forth from
his lips,\" a soldier said. \"We bent closer, frightened and
unhappy, listening.\"

\"Important, all right\" agreed Shadrach. \"Not something you\'d
want to miss.\"

\"He spoke the name of him who will lead us.\"

\"Good. You caught it, then. Well, where\'s the difficulty?\"

\"The name he spoke was --- was your name.\"

Shadrach stared. *\"Mine?\"*

\"The dying king said: \'Make him, the towering mortal, your
king. Many things will come if he leads the Elves into battle
against the Trolls. I see the rising once again of the Elf
Empire, as it was in the old days, as it was before----\"

\"Me!\" Shadrach leaped up. \"Me? King of the Elves?\"

Shadrach walked about the room, his hands in his pockets. \"Me,
Shad­rach Jones, King of the Elves.\" He grinned a little. \"I
sure never thought of it before.\"

He went to the mirror over the fireplace and studied himself. He
saw his thin, graying hair, his bright eyes, dark skin, his big
Adam's apple.

\"King of the Elves\" he said. \"King of the Elves. Wait till
Phineas Judd hears about this. Wait till I tell him!\"

Phineas Judd would certainly be surprised!

\

       Above the filling station, the sun shone, high in the
clear blue sky. Phineas Judd sat playing with the accelerator of
his old Ford truck. The motor raced and slowed. Phineas reached
over and turned the ignition key off, then rolled the window all
the way down.

\"What did you say?\" he asked. He took off his glasses and
began to polish them, steel rims between slender, deft fingers
that were patient from years of practice. He restored his
glasses to his nose and smoothed what remained of his hair into
place.\"What was it, Shadrach?\" he said. \"Let's hear that
again.\"

\
      \"I'm King of the Elves,\" Shadrach repeated. He changed
position, bringing his other foot up on the running board. \"Who
would have thought it? Me, Shadrach Jones, King of the Elves.\"

\
      Phineas gazed at him. \"How long have you been---King of
the Elves, Shadrach?\"

\"Since the night before last.\"

\
      \"I see. The night before last.\" Phineas nodded. \"I see.
And what, may I ask, occurred the night before last?\"

\"The Elves came to my house. When the old king died, he told
them that---\"

\

A truck came rumbling up and the driver leaped out. \"Water!\"
he said. \"Where the hell is the hose?\"

      Shadrach turned reluctantly. "I'll get it.\" He turned
back to Phineas. \"Maybe I can talk to you tonight when you come
back from town. I want to tell you the rest. It\'s very
interesting.\"

\"Sure,\" Phineas said, starting up his little truck. \"Sure,
Shadrach. I\'m very interested to hear.\"

He drove off down the road.

Later in the day, Dan Green ran his flivver up to the filling
station.

\"Hey, Shadrach,\" he called. \"Come over here! I want to ask
you something.\"

Shadrach came out of the little house, holding a waste-rag in
his hand.

\"What is it?\"

\"Come here.\" Dan leaned out the window, a wide grin on his
face, splitting his face from ear to ear. \"Let me ask you
something, will you?\"

\"Sure.\"

\"Is it true? Are you really the King of the Elves?\"

Shadrach flushed a little. \"I guess I am,\" he admitted,
looking away. \"That\'s what I am~,~ all right.\"

Dan\'s grin faded. \"Hey, you trying to kid me? What's the
gag?\"

Shadrach became angry. \"\"What do you mean? Sure, I\'m the King
of the Elves. And anyone who says I\'m not---\"

\"All right, Shadrach,\" Dan said, starting up the flivver
quickly. \"Don\'t get mad. I was just wondering.\"

Shadrach looked very strange.

\"All right,\" Dan said. \"You don\'t hear me arguing, do you?\"

\

      By the end of the day, everyone around knew about Shadrach
and how he had suddenly become the King of the Elves. Pop
Eichey, who ran the Lucky Store in Derryville, claimed Shadrach
was doing it to drum up trade for the filling station.

\"He\'s a smart old fellow,\" Pop said. \"Not very many cars go
along there anymore. He knows what he\'s doing.\"

\"I don\'t know,\" Dan Green disagreed. \"You should hear him, I
think he really believes it.\"

\"King of the Elves?\" They all began to laugh. \"Wonder what
he\'ll say next.\"

Phineas Judd pondered. "I've known Shadrach for years. I can\'t
figure it out.\" He frowned, his face wrinkled and disapproving.
\"I don\'t like it.\"

Dan looked at him. \"Then you think he believes it?\"

\"Sure,\" Phineas said. \"Maybe I\'m wrong, but I really think
he does.\"

\"But how could he believe it?\" Pop asked. \"Shadrach is no
fool. He\'s been in business for a long time. He must be getting
something out of it, the way I see it. But what, if it isn't to
build up the filling station?\"

\"Why, don\'t you know what he\'s getting?\" Dan said, grinning.
His gold tooth shone.

\"What?\" Pop demanded.

\"He\'s got a whole kingdom to himself, that\'s what---to do
with like he wants. How would you like that, Pop? Wouldn\'t you
like to be King of the Elves and not have to run this old store
anymore?\"

\"There isn\'t anything wrong with my store,\" Pop said. \"I
ain\'t ashamed to run it. Better than being a clothing
salesman.\"

Dan flushed. \"Nothing wrong with that, either.\" He looked at
Phineas. \"Isn\'t that right? Nothing wrong with selling
clothes, is there, Phineas?\"

Phineas was staring down at the floor. He glanced up. \"What?
What was that?\"

\"What you thinking about?\" Pop wanted to know. \"You look
worried.\"

\"I\'m worried about Shadrach,\" Phineas said. \"He\'s getting
old. Sitting out there by himself all the time, in the cold
weather, with the rainwater running over the floor---it blows
something awful in the winter, along the highway---\"

\"Then you *do* think he believes it?\" Dan persisted. \"You
*don\'t* think he\'s getting something out of it?\"

Phineas shook his head absently and did not answer.

The laughter died down. They all looked at one another.

\

      That night, as Shadrach was locking up the filling
station, a small fig­ure came toward him from the darkness.

\"Hey!\" Shadrach called out. \"Who are you?\"

An Elf soldier came into the light, blinking. He was dressed in
a little gray robe, buckled at the waist with a band of silver.
On his feet were little leather boots. He carried a short sword
at his side.

\"I have a serious message for you,\" the Elf said. \"Now, where
did I put it?\"He searched his robe while Shadrach waited. The
Elf brought out a tiny scroll and unfastened it, breaking the
wax expertly. He handed it to Shadrach.

\"What\'s it say?\" Shadrach asked. He bent over, his eyes close
to the vellum. \"I don\'t have my glasses with me. Can\'t quite
make out these little letters.\"

\"The Trolls are moving. They\'ve heard that the old king is
dead, and they\'re rising, in all the hills and valleys around.
They will try to break the Elf Kingdom into fragments, scatter
the Elves---\"

\"I see,\" Shadrach said. \"Before your new king can really get
started.\"

\"That's right.\" The Elf soldier nodded. \"This is a crucial
moment for the Elves. For centuries, our existence has been
precarious. There are so many Trolls, and Elves are very frail
and often take sick---\"

\"Well, what should I do? Are there any suggestions?\"

\"You\'re supposed to meet with us under the Great Oak tonight.
We\'ll take you into the Elf Kingdom, and you and your staff
will plan and map the defense of the Kingdom.\"

\"What?\" Shadrach looked uncomfortable. \"But I haven\'t eaten
dinner. And my gas station----tomorrow is Saturday, and a lot of
cars---\"

\"But you are King of the Elves,\" the soldier said.

Shadrach put his hand to his chin and rubbed it slowly.

\"That\'s right,\" he replied. \"I am, ain\'t I?\"

The Elf soldier bowed.

\"I wish I\'d known this sort of thing was going to happen,\"
Shadrach said. \"I didn\'t suppose being King of the Elves----\"

He broke off, hoping for an interruption. The Elf soldier
watched him calmly, without expression.

\"Maybe you ought to have someone else as your king,\" Shadrach
decided. \"I don\'t know very much about war and things like
that, fighting and all that sort of business.\" He paused,
shrugged his shoulders. \"It's nothing I've ever mixed in. They
don\'t have wars here in Colorado. I mean they don\'t have wars
between human beings.\"

Still the Elf soldier remained silent.

\
      \"Why was I picked?\" Shadrach went on helplessly,
twisting his hands. \"I don't know anything about it. What made
him go and pick me? Why didn't he pick somebody else?\"

\"He trusted you,\" the Elf said. \"You brought him inside your
house, out of the rain. He knew that you expected nothing for
it, that there was noth­ing you wanted. He had known few who
gave and asked nothing back.\"

\"Oh.\" Shadrach thought it over. At last he looked up. \"But
what about my gas station? And my house? And what will they say,
Dan Green and Pop down at the store---\"

The Elf soldier moved away, out of the light. \"I have to go.
It\'s getting late, and at night the Trolls come out. I don\'t
want to be too far away from the others.\"

\"Sure,\" Shadrach said.

\"The Trolls are afraid of nothing, now that the old king is
dead. They forage everywhere. No one is safe.\"

\"Where did you say the meeting is to be? And what time?\"

\"At the Great Oak. When the moon sets tonight, just as it
leaves the sky.\"

"I'll be there, I guess,\" Shadrach said. \"I suppose you\'re
right. The King of the Elves can\'t afford to let his kingdom
down when it needs him most.\"

He looked around, but the Elf soldier was already gone.

Shadrach walked up the highway, his mind full of doubts and
wonderings. When he came to the first of the flat stone steps,
he stopped.

\"And the old oak tree is on Phineas\'s farm! What\'ll Phineas
say?\"

But he was the Elf King and the Trolls were moving in the hills.
Shad­rach stood listening to the rustle of the wind as it moved
through the trees beyond the highway, and along the far slopes
and hills.

Trolls? Were there really Trolls there, rising up, bold and
confident in the darkness of the night, afraid of nothing,
afraid of no one?

And this business of being Elf King \...

Shadrach went on up the steps, his lips pressed tight. When he
reached the top of the stone steps, the last rays of sunlight
had already faded. It was night.

Phineas Judd stared out the window. He swore and shook his head.
Then he went quickly to the door and ran out onto the porch. In
the cold moonlight a dim figure was walking slowly across the
lower field, coming toward the house along the cow trail.

\"Shadrach!\" Phineas cried. \"What's wrong? What are you doing
out this time of night?\"

Shadrach stopped and put his fists stubbornly on his hips.

\"You go back home,\" Phineas said. \"What\'s got into you?\"

"I'm sorry, Phineas\" Shadrach answered. "I'm sorry I have to go
over your land. But I have to meet somebody at the old oak
tree.\"

\"At this time of night?\"

Shadrach bowed his head.

\"What\'s the matter with you, Shadrach? Who in the world you
going to meet in the middle of the night on my farm?\"

\"I have to meet with the Elves. We\'re going to plan out the
war with the trolls.\"

\"Well, I'll be damned\" Phineas Judd said. He went back inside
the house and slammed the door. For a long time he stood
thinking. Then he went back out on the porch again. \"What did
you say you were doing? You don\'t have to tell me, of course,
but I just---\"

\"I have to meet the Elves at the old oak tree. We must have a
general council of war against the Trolls.\"

\"Yes, indeed. The Trolls. Have to watch for the Trolls all the
time.\"

\"Trolls are everywhere,\" Shadrach stated, nodding his head.
\"I never realized it before. You can\'t forget them or ignore
them. They never forget you. They\'re always planning, watching
you----\"

Phineas gaped at him, speechless.

\
      \"Oh, by the way,\" Shadrach said. \"I may be gone for
some time. It depends on how long this business is going to
take. I haven\'t had much experience in fighting Trolls, so I\'m
not sure. But I wonder if you'd mind looking after the gas
station for me, about twice a day, maybe once in the morning and
once at night, to make sure no one\'s broken in or anything like
that.\"

\"You\'re going away?\" Phineas came quickly down the stairs.
\"What's all this about Trolls? Why are you going?\"

Shadrach patiently repeated what he had said.

\

\"But what for?\"

\"Because I\'m the Elf King. I have to lead them.\"

\
      There was silence. \"I see,\" Phineas said, at last.
\"That's right, you *did* mention it before, didn't you? But,
Shadrach, why don't you come inside for a while and you can tell
me about the Trolls and drink some coffee and---\"

\"Coffee?\" Shadrach looked up at the pale moon above him, the
moon and the bleak sky. The world was still and dead and the
night was very cold and the moon would not be setting for some
time.

Shadrach shivered.

\"It's a cold night,\" Phineas urged. \"Too cold to be out. Come
on in---\"

\"I guess I have a little time\" Shadrach admitted. \"A cup of
coffee wouldn't do any harm. But I can\'t stay very long\...\"

Shadrach stretched his legs out and sighed. \"This coffee sure
tastes good, Phineas.\"

Phineas sipped a little and put his cup down. The living room
was quiet and warm. It was a very neat little living room with
solemn pictures on the walls, gray uninteresting pictures that
minded their own business. In the corner was a small reed organ
with sheet music carefully arranged on top of it.

Shadrach noticed the organ and smiled. \"You still play,
Phineas?\"

\"Not much anymore. The bellows don\'t work right. One of them
won\'t come back up.\"

\"I suppose I could fix it sometime. If I\'m around, I mean.\"

\"That would be fine,\" Phineas said. \"I was thinking of asking
you.\"

\"Remember how you used to play \'Vilia\' and Dan Green came up
with that lady who worked for Pop during the summer? The one who
wanted to open a pottery shop?\"

\"I sure do,\" Phineas said.

Presently, Shadrach set down his coffee cup and shifted in his
chair.

\"You want more coffee?\" Phineas asked quickly. He stood up.
\"A little more?\"

\"Maybe a little. But I have to be going pretty soon.\"

\"It\'s a bad night to be outside.\"

\
      Shadrach looked through the window. It was darker; the
moon had almost gone down. The fields were stark. Shadrach
shivered. \"I wouldn\'t disagree with you\" he said.

       Phineas turned eagerly. \"Look, Shadrach. You go on home
where it\'s warm. You can come out and fight Trolls some other
night. There\'ll always be Trolls. You said so yourself. Plenty
of time to do that later, when the weather\'s better. When it\'s
not so cold.\"

Shadrach rubbed his forehead wearily. \"You know, it all seems
like some sort of a crazy dream. When did I start talking about
Elves and Trolls? When did it all begin?\" His voice trailed
off. \"Thank you for the coffee.\" He got slowly to his feet.
\"It warmed me up a lot. And I appreciated the talk. Like old
times, you and me sitting here the way we used to.\"

\"Are you going?\" Phineas hesitated. *\"Home?\"*

\"I think I better. It's late.\"

Phineas got quickly to his feet. He led Shadrach to the door,
one arm around his shoulder.

\"All right, Shadrach, you go on home. Take a good hot bath
before you go to bed. It'll fix you up. And maybe just a little
snort of brandy to warm the blood.\"

Phineas opened the front door and they went slowly down the
porch steps, onto the cold, dark ground.

\"Yes, I guess I\'ll be going,\" Shadrach said. \"Good
night---^"^

\"You go on home.\" Phineas patted him on the arm. \"You run
along home and take a good hot bath. And then go straight to
bed.\"

\"That\'s a good idea. Thank you, Phineas. I appreciate your
kindness.\" Shadrach looked down at Phineas\'s hand on his arm.
He had not been that close to Phineas for years.

Shadrach contemplated the hand. He wrinkled his brow, puzzled.

Phineas\'s hand was huge and rough and his arms were short. His
fingers were blunt; his nails broken and cracked. Almost black,
or so it seemed in the moonlight.

Shadrach looked up at Phineas. \"Strange,\" he murmured.

\"What\'s strange, Shadrach?\"

In the moonlight, Phineas\'s face seemed oddly heavy and brutal.
Shadrach had never noticed before how the jaw bulged, what a
great protruding jaw it was. The skin was yellow and coarse,
like parchment. Behind the glasses, the eyes were like two
stones, cold and lifeless. The ears were immense, the hair
stringy and matted.

Odd that he never noticed before. But he had never seen Phineas
in the moonlight.

Shadrach stepped away, studying his old friend. From a few feet
off, Phineas Judd seemed unusually short and squat. His legs
were slightly bowed. His feet were enormous. And there was
something else---

\"What is it?" Phineas demanded, beginning to grow suspicious.
\"Is there something wrong?\"

Something was completely wrong. And he had never noticed it, not
in all the years they had been friends. All around Phineas Judd
was an odor, a faint, pungent stench of rot, of decaying flesh,
damp and moldy.

Shadrach glanced slowly about him. \"Something wrong?\" he
echoed. \"No, I wouldn\'t say that.\"

By the side of the house was an old rain barrel, half fallen
apart. Shad­rach walked over to it.

\"No, Phineas. I wouldn't say there\'s something wrong.\"

\"What are you doing?\"

\"Me?\" Shadrach took hold of one of the barrel staves and
pulled it loose. He walked back to Phineas, carrying the barrel
stave carefully. "I'm King of the Elves. Who----or what---are
you?\"

Phineas roared and attacked with his great murderous shovel
hands.

Shadrach smashed him over the head with the barrel stave.
Phineas bellowed with rage and pain.

At the shattering sound, there was a clatter and from underneath
the house came a furious horde of bounding, leaping creatures,
dark bent-over things, their bodies heavy and squat, their feet
and heads immense. Shadrach took one look at the flood of dark
creatures pouring out from Phineas\'s basement. He knew what
they were.

\"Help!\" Shadrach shouted. \"Trolls! Help!\"

\
       The Trolls were all around him, grabbing hold of him,
tugging at him, climbing up him, pummeling his face and body.

Shadrach fell to with the barrel stave, swung again and again,
kicking Trolls with his feet, whacking them with the barrel
stave. There seemed to be hundreds of them. More and more poured
out from under Phineas\'s house, a surging black tide of
pot-shaped creatures, their great eyes and teeth gleaming in the
moonlight.

\
       \"Help!\" Shadrach cried again, more feebly now. He was
getting winded. His heart labored painfully. A Troll bit his
wrist, clinging to his arm. Shadrach flung it away, pulling
loose from the horde clutching his trouser legs, the barrel
stave rising and falling.

One of the Trolls caught hold of the stave. A whole group of
them helped, wrenching furiously, trying to pull it away.
Shadrach hung on desperately. Trolls were all over him, on his
shoulders, clinging to his coat, riding his arms, his legs,
pulling his hair---

He heard a high-pitched clarion call from a long way off, the
sound of some distant golden trumpet, echoing in the hills.

The Trolls suddenly stopped attacking. One of them dropped off
Shadrach\'s neck. Another let go of his arm.

The call came again, this time more loudly.

\"Elves!\" a Troll rasped. He turned and moved toward the sound,
grinding his teeth and spitting with fury.

\"Elves!\"

The Trolls swarmed forward, a growing wave of gnashing teeth and
nails, pushing furiously toward the Elf columns. The Elves broke
formation and joined battle, shouting with wild joy in their
shrill, piping voices. The tide of Trolls rushed against them,
Troll against Elf, shovel nails against golden sword, biting jaw
against dagger.

\"Kill the Elves!\"

\"Death to the Trolls!\"

\"Onward!"

\"Forward!\"

Shadrach fought desperately with the Trolls that were still
clinging to him. He was exhausted, panting and gasping for
breath. Blindly, he whacked on and on, kicking and jumping,
throwing Trolls away from him, through the air and across the
ground.

\

How long the battle raged, Shadrach never knew. He was lost in a
sea of dark bodies, round and evil-smelling, clinging to him,
tearing, biting, fastened to his nose and hair and fingers. He
fought silently, grimly.

All around him, the Elf legions clashed with the Troll horde,
little groups of struggling warriors on all sides.

Suddenly Shadrach stopped fighting. He raised his head, looking
uncertainly around him. Nothing moved. Everything was silent.
The fighting had ceased.

A few Trolls still clung to his arms and legs. Shadrach whacked
one with the barrel stave. It howled and dropped to the ground.
He staggered back, struggling with the last Troll, who hung
tenaciously to his arm.

\"Now you!\" Shadrach gasped. He pried the Troll loose and flung
it into the air. The Troll fell to the ground and scuttled off
into the night.

There was nothing more. No Troll moved anywhere. All was silent
across the bleak moon-swept fields.

Shadrach sank down on a stone. His chest rose and fell
painfully. Red specks swam before his eyes. Weakly, he got out
his pocket handkerchief and wiped his neck and face. He closed
his eyes, shaking his head from side to side. When he opened his
eyes again, the Elves were coming toward him, gathering their
legion together again. The Elves were disheveled and bruised.
Their golden armor was gashed and torn. Their helmets were bent
or missing. Most of their scarlet plumes were gone. Those that
still remained were drooping and broken.

But the battle was over. The war was won. The Troll hordes had
been put to flight. Shadrach got slowly to his feet. The Elf
warriors stood around him in a circle, gazing up at him with
silent respect. One of them helped steady him as he put his
handkerchief away in his pocket.

\"Thank you,\" Shadrach murmured. \"Thank you very much.\"

\"The Trolls have been defeated,\" an Elf stated, still awed by
what had happened.

Shadrach gazed around at the Elves. There were many of them,
more than he had ever seen before. All the Elves had turned out
for the battle. They were grim-faced, stern with the seriousness
of the moment, weary from the terrible struggle.

\

\"Yes, they\'re gone, all right,\" Shadrach said. He was
beginning to get his breath. \"That was a close call. I\'m glad
you fellows came when you did. I was just about finished,
fighting them all by myself.\"

\"All alone, the King of the Elves held off the entire Troll
army,\" an Elf announced shrilly.

\
       \"Eh?\" Shadrach said, taken aback. Then he smiled.
\"That\'s true, I *did* fight them alone for a while. I *did*
hold off the Trolls all by myself. The whole darn Troll army.\"

\"There is more\" an Elf said.

Shadrach blinked. \"More?\"

\

\"Look over here, O King, mightiest of all the Elves. This way.
To the right\"

The Elves led Shadrach over.

\"What is it?\" Shadrach murmured, seeing nothing at first. He
gazed down, trying to pierce the darkness. \"Could we have a
torch over here?\"

Some Elves brought little pine torches. There, on the frozen
ground, lay Phineas Judd, on his back. His eyes were blank and
staring, his mouth half open. He did not move. His body was cold
and stiff.

\"He is dead,\" an Elf said solemnly.

Shadrach gulped in sudden alarm. Cold sweat stood out abruptly
on his forehead. \"My gosh! My old friend! What have I done?\"

\"You have slain the Great Troll.\"

Shadrach paused.

\"I *what?"*

\"You have slain the Great Troll, leader of all the Trolls.\"

\"This has never happened before,\" another Elf exclaimed
excitedly. \"The Great Troll has lived for centuries. Nobody
imagined he could die. This is our most historic moment.\"

All the Elves gazed down at the silent form with awe, awe mixed
with more than a little fear.

\"Oh, go on!\" Shadrach said. \"That\'s just Phineas Judd.\"

But as he spoke, a chill moved up his spine. He remembered what
he had seen a little while before, as he stood close by Phineas,
as the dying moonlight crossed his old friend\'s face.

\"Look.\" One of the Elves bent over and unfastened Phineas\'s
blue-serge vest. He pushed the coat and vest aside. \"See?\"

Shadrach bent down to look.

\
      He gasped. Underneath Phineas Judd\'s blue-serge vest was
a suit of mail, an encrusted mesh of ancient, rusting iron,
fastened tightly around the squat body. On the mail stood an
engraved insignia, dark and timeworn, embedded with dirt and
rust A moldering half-obliterated emblem. The emblem of a
crossed owl leg and toadstool.

The emblem of the Great Troll. \"Golly,\" Shadrach said. \"And
*I* killed him.\"

For a long time he gazed silently down. Then, slowly,
realization began to grow in him. He straightened up, a smile
forming on his face.

\"What is it, O King?\" an Elf piped.

\"I just thought of something,\" Shadrach said. \"I just
realized that-----that since the Great Troll is dead and the
Troll army has been put to flight---\"

He broke off. All the Elves were waiting.

\"I thought maybe I---that is, maybe if you don\'t need me
anymore---\"

The Elves listened respectfully. \"What is it, Mighty King? Go
on.\"

\"I thought maybe now I could go back to the filling station and
not be king any more." Shadrach glanced hopefully around at
them. \"Do you think so? With the war over and all. With him
dead, What do you say?\"

For a time, the Elves were silent. They gazed unhappily down at
the ground. None of them said anything. At last they began
moving away, collecting their banners and pennants.

\"Yes, you may go back,\" an Elf said quietly. \"The war is
over. The Trolls have been defeated. You may return to your
filling station, if that is what you want.\"

A flood of relief swept over Shadrach. He straightened up,
grinning from ear to ear. \"Thanks! That\'s fine. That\'s really
fine. That\'s the best news I've heard in my life.\" He moved
away from the Elves, rubbing his hands together and blowing on
them.

\"Thanks an awful lot.\" He grinned around at the silent Elves.
\"Well, I guess I'll be running along, then. It\'s late. Late
and cold. It\'s been a hard night. I'll---I'll see you around.\"

\

The Elves nodded silently.

\"Fine. Well, good night.\" Shadrach turned and started along
the path. He stopped for a moment, waving back at the Elves.
\"It was quite a battle, wasn\'t it? We really licked them.\" He
hurried on along the path. Once again he stopped, looking back
and waving. \"Sure glad I could help out. Well, good night!\"

\

One or two of the Elves waved, but none of them said anything.

\

       Shadrach Jones walked slowly toward his place. He could
see it from the rise, the highway that few cars traveled, the
filling station falling to ruin, the house that might not last
as long as himself, and not enough money coming in to repair
them or buy a better location.

He turned around and went back.

The Elves were still gathered there in the silence of the night.
They had not moved away.

\"I was hoping you hadn\'t gone,\" Shadrach said, relieved.

\"And we were hoping you would not leave,\" said a soldier.

Shadrach kicked a stone. It bounced through the tight silence
and stopped. The Elves were still watching him.

\"Leave?\" Shadrach asked. \"And me King of the Elves?\"

\
\"Then you will remain our king?\" an Elf cried.

\"It\'s a hard thing for a man of my age to change. To stop
selling gasoline and suddenly be a king. It scared me for a
while. But it doesn\'t anymore.\"

\"You will? You *will?"*

\"Sure,\" said Shadrach Jones.

The little circle of Elf torches closed in joyously. In their
light, he saw a platform like the one that had carried the old
King of the Elves. But this one was much larger, big enough to
hold a man, and dozens of the soldiers waited with proud
shoulders under the shafts.

A soldier gave him a happy bow. \"For you, Sire.\"

Shadrach climbed aboard. It was less comfortable than walking,
but he knew this was how they wanted to take him to the Kingdom
of the Elves.


**Philip K. Dick** (December 16, 1928 -- March 2, 1982) was an
American novelist, short story writer and essayist whose
published work is almost entirely in the science fiction genre.
Dick explored sociological, political and metaphysical themes in
novels dominated by monopolistic corporations, authoritarian
governments and altered states. In his later works Dick\'s
thematic focus strongly reflected his personal interest in
metaphysics and theology. He often drew upon his own life
experiences in addressing the nature of drug abuse, paranoia and
schizophrenia, and transcendental experiences in novels such as
A Scanner Darkly and VALIS.

