# Fall of the Spirits of Darkness

![](darkness.png)

## by Rudolf Steiner

### Lecture One (to members of the Antroposophical Society)

### The Driving Force Behind the First World War

Dornach ****29 September, 1917 GA 177****


****Translated by A.R. Meuss - edited here.****                  |

It is a matter of deep satisfaction to me, as I think you know, to
be with you again for a while, for this is the place where we are
able to create a visible sign of our intentions and of the will to
come closer and closer to a true knowledge of the spirit in our
studies and in our work in spiritual science.

The quest for knowledge is intimately bound up with the most inward
aspect of the human being, and every now and then we must therefore
enquire into the essential nature of our will and intent. In the
light of the present situation, woeful as it is, it seems the answer
to this question must be a negative one. For more than three years
we have seen something spread across the world that I need not
discuss in detail, at least to begin with, for we are all aware of
it and feel it deeply. The events now taking place are the opposite
of our own intentions, which have come to expression in this very
building.

Again and again we must try to see clearly which stream of spiritual
development we wish to see taken up by humanity, and today we have
to say it is the opposite of the stream which has led to the
terrible tragedy of these last years. This is something we may call
to mind again and again when we give deep and full consideration to
the events now raging all over the world. We may say to ourselves
that it appears as if time were drawn out and had become elastic, as
if the things we remember from before this madness took hold of the
world happened not just years but centuries ago.

There will, of course, be many today --- as there always have been
--- who may be said to sleep through the events of the day, people
who are not fully awake to what is going on today. But when those
who are awake look back on what went through their minds four or
five years ago and left an impression, they will feel more or the
less the way one does when one lets the mind dwell on an old book or
a work of art that was created hundreds of years ago. Events which
meant something to us before this madness came on the world now seem
to have happened an infinitely long time ago.

Anyone who was awake was able to appreciate what was coming even
before these events developed. Many of our friends will remember the
almost routine answer I gave to questions asked over and over again
after my public lectures from the beginning of this century. The
question, you may remember, was: "According to the statistics, the
world population is increasing; how does this relate to the idea of
repeated earth lives? The increase in population is rapid. How can
one reconcile this with the spiritual scientific finding that these
are always the same souls?" My answer always had to be: It does look
as if the statisticians are right and the world population is
increasing; but we have to take a longer view and consider much
longer time-spans if we are to do justice to the question. And I
would always go on to say that a time may well come, sooner than we
may expect, when people discover to their horror that the population
can also decrease.

I t is not always possible to give plain and simple answers in
anthroposophy. People have not yet reached the point where they are
able to take truths in the right way and some things can only be
hinted at. Read through the lectures given in Vienna not long before
this catastrophe came on our world and you will find the passage
where I spoke of the social cancer that is gnawing away at the
evolution of humanity. This and other things were said in order to
indicate what was going to happen in human evolution and to
challenge people to reflect. For we need to reflect on these things
if we are really and truly to wake up. We need to be awake and alive
for the sake of humanity. If anthroposophy is to fulfil its purpose,
its prime task must be to rouse people and make them really wake up.
Merely knowing what is going on in the physical world, and knowing
the laws that human minds are able to perceive as operative in this
world, is no more than being asleep in a higher sense. Humanity is
only fully awake when people are able to develop notions and ideas
of the spiritual world. This is all around us, just as air and
water, the stars, the sun and the moon are all around us. When we
are physically asleep we are wholly given up to the internal
processes that go on in the body during the night and have no idea
of anything in the physical world around us. We are asleep in
exactly the same way when we are wholly given up to the physical
environment, and to the world and the laws of the intellect, and
have no idea of the spiritual world that is all around us.

Humanity has made great play of its intellectual progress and
scientific achievements in the last few centuries and has been
particularly insistent on this at the turn of the nineteenth to the
twentieth century. Yet, strangely enough, the unconscious and
instinctive life was never more to the fore than it is at this time.
Up to the present time this instinctive and unconscious element has
increasingly taken hold of the human race. Failure to see the
spiritual reality and take account of the spiritual element is
ultimately the cause of this terrible world war. Nor can it be said
that through these years --- years which have turned into centuries
for anyone who is awake in them --- humanity has learned an adequate
lesson from the terrible events around us. Sadly, it has to be said
that the opposite is the case.

What is the characteristic element to be found day by day, hour by
hour, when we take note of what people think, or rather pretend to
think and pretend to want? It is that, fundamentally speaking, no
one in the world knows what they want, and no one realizes that
people\'s perfectly justifiable aims, whichever form they may take
in the minds of individual nations, would be achieved so much better
if they did away with these terrible wars in which so much blood is
shed. People do not realize that these terrible events with their
bloodshed are really not necessary as a means of helping them to
achieve their aims.

These events have a mysterious background, but if you consider some
of the things said in our anthroposophical lectures over the years,
even if they have only been touched on lightly, you will find
perfectly clear statements, also with reference to the most
significant of recent events. Consider also what has been said in
these very rooms, especially in the last few years, on the character
of the Russian people and the difference between the Russians and
the peoples of Western and Central Europe. **\[1\]** You will find
that you need the things which have been said here to gain
understanding of an event that appears to have occurred with such
vehemence. It has burst forth as though it were a karmic vengeance,
the inner meaning of which is quite clear, though the word
'vengeance' must be taken as a technical term and not at all in a
moral sense.

Not only the Russian people, but those of Europe and the whole
world, will have to reflect for a long time to come on the events in
Eastern Europe, events much more mysterious than we are inclined to
think. Something has come to the surface which has been preparing
for centuries. The new element wanting to take shape is something
completely different from what is actually taking shape. Later
generations will be able to use the events which will be taking
shape in Eastern Europe over the next decades to demonstrate the
difference between *maya* and reality. For you see, the generations
of today are taking what is happening now for the real thing, when
this is in fact still waiting in the wings, and they are wrong in
taking it for real, for something quite different wants to make its
appearance.

The people in the West are ill-equipped to understand what wants to
come to the surface. Why are they so ill-equipped? Strange as it may
seem to people today, the present age is more than any other age
demanding the one thing people least want to have: understanding
based on spiritual science. Strange as it may sound to the average
people of today, order will not be created from the chaos of the
present time until a sufficiently large number of people are
prepared to recognize the truths of that science. Such will be the
karma of world history.

If people insist that this war is just like the wars of the past and
that we\'ll be making peace just as peace has been made before ---
let them talk. They are the people who love *maya* and do not
distinguish between truth and deception. Let them make what may seem
like 'peace' Order will only arise from the chaos that fills the
world today when insight based on spiritual science dawns in human
minds. You may feel in your hearts that it will be a long time
before such order comes; you may think it will be a long time before
people are prepared to let the dawn of such a science arise, and you
will be right. You have to accept that it will be a long time before
order arises from the chaos. For it will not come until human hearts
understand the realm of the spirit. Order can only come when it is
understood how this chaos has arisen.

Chaos has arisen because the reality is considered in an unspiritual
way -- and the spiritual world cannot be ignored with impunity. You
may think it is enough to live with thoughts and ideas that are
wholly derived from the physical world. It is what people generally
think today, though this does not make it true. The most completely
and utterly wrong idea humanity has ever had is, to put it simply,
that the spirits will put up with being ignored. You may consider it
egotistical and selfish on their part, but the terminology is
different in their world. Egotism or not, the spirits take their
revenge if they are ignored here on earth. This is a law, an iron
necessity. One way to characterize the present time is to say that
the present human chaos is the revenge of the spirits who have been
ignored for too long .

I have often said, both here and elsewhere, that a mysterious
connection exists between human consciousness and the destructive
powers of decline and fall in the universe. Each can, or indeed
must, take the place of the other in the following way.

Let us assume there was a time, say during the last twenty or thirty
years of the nineteenth century, when people put the same effort
into their quest for the things of the spirit as they have put into
achieving material knowledge and material actions. What would have
happened if they had endeavoured to recognize the spiritual world
and used this to give a character, a foundation, to the physical
world, rather than follow mere instinct and chase after more and
more knowledge of a kind that has seen its ultimate triumph in the
creation of instruments of murder and found its be-all and end-all
in people enriching themselves with nothing but material goods? What
would have happened if people had sought to gain spiritual knowledge
and spiritual impulses for their activities in the social sphere? It
would have meant that the powers of destruction were compensated. If
people had been more awake and not asleep in the last decades of the
nineteenth century, there would have been greater awareness and
therefore no need for destruction in the first decades of the
twentieth century. Spiritual awareness simply has to be greater than
purely sensory and material awareness. If this had been the case
during the last decades of the nineteenth century, the powers of
destruction would not have had to intervene in the early decades of
the twentieth century.

This is brought to realization most insistently, and perhaps most
cruelly, to the perceptive mind when you meet many of the dead who
have entered the world of the spirit either during the last decades
of the nineteenth or the first decades of the twentieth century.
Many of them had been caught up in the hustle and bustle and search
for material values here on earth and never had the opportunity to
let spiritual impulses arouse awareness. Many have gone through the
gate of death without even a notion of the thoughts and ideas that
point to spiritual impulses. If they had had the opportunity to take
in spiritual thoughts and ideas before they went through the gate of
death they could have taken these with them. It would have been
something they needed after death, but they were not in a position
to have it.

Anyone who knows the history of ideas of the last decades of the
nineteenth and the first decades of the twentieth century also knows
that people actually no longer knew how to use the term 'spirit'. It
has been used to describe all kinds of things, but not the true
spirit. Those souls therefore had no opportunity of knowing the
spirit whilst here on earth and they have to take the consequences.
Having gone through the gate of death and entered the world of the
spirit, they are thirsting for --- well, what are they thirsting
for, these souls who lived in materialism here? They are thirsting
for destructive powers in the physical world! Those are the dues and
they must be paid.

There is no easy way of dealing with these things. If we want to
know the realities in this sphere, we must acquire a feeling for
what the ancient Egyptians called 'iron necessity'. Terrible as it
may be, it was necessary that destruction should spread, for those
who had gone through the gate of death were longing for the
destructive powers in which they are able to live, seeing they did
not receive what was due to them and had been deprived of spiritual
impulses while on earth.

Order cannot arise from the chaos until people are ready to give
room to such grave truths in their souls and also let these truths
enter into the ideas that apply in the world of politics today. And
if these truths sound pessimistic to you and make you think that
humanity is still a long way from achieving all that is demanded, as
I have indicated, you are indeed right. But let this justifiable
pessimism become a challenge to be awake and to try, whatever your
place in life may be, to awaken souls so that spiritual science can
send out its impulses. It cannot yet be done to any great extent,
but we must have the real, honest desire to make people consciously
aware in such a way that they are able to understand this concrete
fact: Longings have arisen in the dead in recent times, and those
longings are being met with events which are truly horrifying for
those of us who are alive here on the physical plane.

Just think how easy it is for some people to present their friends
with a picture of the region into which human beings enter when they
have gone through the gate of death. Consider the unctuous sermons
preached in the churches --- with politicians now actually following
the example of these sermonizers --- and the facile notions people
have of the spiritual world, and you simply cannot help realizing
how far removed from reality is the facile vanity of many of
today\'s leading figures. Compare the speeches of such leading
figures --- their lives show that they do anything but lead and that
they are guided by all kinds of forces of which they are completely
unconscious and which are not the right forces --- compare this with
what is really needed at the present time, and you will realize the
immense gravity of the present situation.

Right next to our physical world is another, non-physical or
spiritual world, and this has never before influenced our world as
intensely as it is doing at the present time. People are not aware
of this, however; they do not even notice when things get
heart-stoppingly fearsome and terrible. Intensely illuminating words
are heard in the world today; they should set vast numbers of people
thinking. But people never notice, or at least they do not show it
if they do.

Some of you will remember that on a number of occasions in the last
three years I have said that when the history of this 'world war' is
written in the future --- unfortunately present-day critics have not
done so, though it could be done fairly easily --- it will be
impossible to use the method which has produced the legend, the
fairy-tale, or call it what you will, which currently goes by the
name of 'history'. This was produced by 'scholars' --- as the world
calls them --- sitting in libraries for months, years and decades
and studying diplomatic records in order to write their histories.
Inevitably a time will come when most of these histories will have
to be pulped. In fact, no one will be able to write the history of
these last years by such a method unless they are literally out of
their minds.

The causes of the chaos will not be apparent to the people who have
been writing histories until now, but only to people who have a real
feeling for what it means when a miserable individual of our time
has to face a court and is forced to sum up the condition he was in
at the time by flinging down before the world the lamentable
statement: 'First one thing happened, then another, and that was the
moment when I went out of my mind!' It was Suchomlinov who spoke
these pitiful words. **\[ 1 \]**                                  |

Many people had gone out of their minds at that time, not only
Suchomlinov. What kind of moments are these in world events when the
only way of describing them is by confessing that one has gone out
of one\'s mind? They are moments when Ahriman and his cohorts gain
access to the human race and to human thoughts. For as long as
people watch over their conscious minds and their consciousness is
not in any way clouded or inactive, neither Ahriman nor Lucifer have
access to it. But when it is not fully active and one needs to use
the phrase 'I have gone out of my mind', that is the moment when
Ahriman and his cohorts enter the stage. The things that happen then
will not appear in diplomatic records --- little of what it says in
those records in recent decades makes real sense, by the way.
Leaving this aside, the things that have happened in our time and
have led to chaos are not merely human actions, but above all the
actions of ahrimanic spirits seeking to gain access by reducing
human consciousness. Some of you know very well that soon after the
present catastrophe broke on the world I pointed out that when we
speak of the origins of this catastrophe in time to come, we must
not do so on the basis of written records; instead we shall have to
point to real facts through which ahrimanic spirits gained access to
the stage of human events.

These things must be taken in all seriousness; they have to be seen
as concrete realities and not merely as abstract formulations.
People who do not know anything about it may well laugh when one
says that Ahriman gained access to human evolution. They may well
laugh at people who say this, but the day will come when world
history laughs them to scorn for having laughed at others today.

We certainly cannot say that the judgments, ideas and notions to be
found on the surface in recent years show any degree of maturity.
People even failed to understand when eighteen months ago it was
pointed out somewhere that something might soon happen of which due
note should be taken; it should not be taken lightly. Concrete
examples given as an indication of what was likely to happen were
never taken in the right way; people were not sufficiently awake in
their minds to do so. Now the event has come. And people fail to
realize that something is taking root deeply in a certain soil.
People are taking it as something which --- well, because a certain
number of statements take up so many lines, people are not at all
interested in looking for the roots of such statements, but simply
take things at their face value.

I think you know what I mean. You know I am referring to the Papal
Note **\[ 2\]** as something I had seen coming for eighteen months.
I have looked around a great deal to see if I might not find someone
who has expressed their views on this Note, or asked the kind of
question that should have come to mind.

Let us remember that the idea of the political state as we know it
today has been dawning since the sixteenth century. In some parts of
the world peculiar people known as 'historians' are speaking of
states as something which have existed for I do not know how long.
But they know little about real history. The present-day idea of a
state is no more than four or five hundred years old and something
entirely different existed in earlier times. It is important to know
this and be really clear about it. The priestly element, which is to
be found in Rome, is indeed older than our modern states. It had its
justification in its own day, when it brought about many things in
the world. I have tried to find out if people are asking themselves
the question: What does it really mean that the modern structures
which have developed over four or five centuries cannot find a way
of achieving order out of their own resources, and look back to the
old priestly element as something to be discussed in the way people
generally discuss things today?

It would interest me to know if anyone faced with the question as to
whether it is a good idea to skate on ice when it is only one
millimeter thick would actually answer in the affirmative. Relative
to what we are really dealing with, the concepts on which people
base their opinions when a priestly element brings impulses into
modern life today are like a one millimeter layer of ice covering
the water. The things people write and say today are like someone
skating on ice that is not more than one millimeter thick. No one is
trying to understand what is happening, no one is prepared to see
that what matters is not to take a document and look at the
statements it contains, but to know that a statement can mean
something totally different, depending on the source from which it
comes.

Everywhere today we are faced with the need to warn people in all
seriousness to look to the origins, to see how things are related,
to look for realities and not to the way things look on the surface.
Surely it cannot be that difficult for anyone to admit: I see the
way things are, but I do not yet understand them and therefore I
will not say anything to interfere. Considering the incredibly
superficial level of education, it is not at all surprising when
people are able to understand and have an opinion on everything.
People find it really difficult to admit that they cannot judge an
issue and need to get a basis for their judgement before they give
an opinion. In fact, it hardly ever comes to their minds that one
has to have a basis which to form an opinion.

Infinitely much depends on real insight into the driving forces,
especially for the immediate future. It has to be realized that the
chaos will certainly not be reduced if --- speaking hypothetically
--- the churches were to succeed in establishing even the initial
stages of apparent order. The worst error we can fall into would be
to say: It does not matter where peace comes from, even if it is
from the Pope. The point is, it may actually cause no harm at all to
have peace initiated by the Pope; the question is how those who are
involved see the issue.

Again and again we need to be really clear in our minds that the
present time is literally challenging us every hour, indeed every
minute, to wake up. Anthroposophy as a science of the spirit can
only be understood by those who are able to grasp that humanity is
being asked to make a clear decision. Either the spirit is
understood or chaos continues. A papered-over chaos would be no
better than the carnage we have today. If we are unable to come up
with anything better than materialism and again materialism, even a
heightened materialism, in the next few years, and if it were to
happen that the events of the last three years, to which humanity
has failed to wake up and take notice, were to lead to a new rush
for material goods --- many people are longing for this as something
that comes with peace --- then souls would once again go through the
gate of death and thirst for destruction here on earth. There would
be no end to the destruction.

All it needs is to get an idea, a feeling, an inner impulse for the
need to turn to the things of the spirit! Then we shall progress,
depending on the extent to which this is achieved. Anyone who wants
to gain a little understanding of the present situation, and looks
at our time in the light of the serious truths we have been
considering, must develop a reasonable degree of feeling for all the
terrible, hopelessly commonplace and superficial things that are now
being written and said in this world.

Imagine a band of children smashing up all the pots and plates,
glasses and everything in the house. The adults who see this
happening are considering how to stop it, for the children keep
running to the larder and all over the house to find more things to
smash. Finally the adults have an idea as to how they can stop it. A
number of people who are watching, people who actually consider
themselves to be the teachers of these children, find a solution:
They take care that everything breakable is collected and smashed to
pieces --- and that, they think, should put an end to it all! I do
not know how many people would not consider those teachers to be
fools. This is the kind of situation where people would see the
truth. Yet there are people who consider themselves to be wise and
who say to the whole world: Carnage must continue until peace comes;
everything has to be broken, so there will be nothing left to smash
in the world. This is considered wisdom. Go on murdering people for
as long as you can and you will stop the murder. This is wisdom!

For anyone who has even a spark of logic it is no longer wisdom when
the teacher says to a band of children: To make sure nothing else
gets smashed up, I will quickly get people to collect all other
breakable objects and smash them; I reckon nothing else will get
smashed after that. Why do people call this foolishness and the
other thing political foresight? Because thinking stops at the very
point where it should be most intense, which is where our thoughts
relate to great questions of destiny.

We shall continue with this tomorrow, and consider some serious
spiritual truths.

****\[1\] Vladimir Alexandrovitch Suchomlinov, 1848--1926, Minister
for War at the time when the First World War broke out. Together
with Janushkievitch, Chief of ****General Staff, and Sasonov,
Foreign Minister, Suchomlinov played a key role in the fateful
mobilization of the Russian army on 29 July 1914, ignoring a direct
order from the Tsar to countermand the mobilization at the last
minute. After the deposition of the Tsar, Suchomlinov was questioned
in court. According to the paper *****Novoie Vremia*****, the words
he said in court were: 'On that day I almost went out of my mind.'
Quoted from Suchomlinov, die russische *****Mobilmachung im Lichte
amtlicher Urkunden und der Entlillungen des Prozesses*****, Berne
1917.****

****\[2\] On 1 August 1917 Pope Benedict XV issued a peace note to
the governments of the belligerent nations.****

Thanks to the \<a href="https://rsarchive.org"\>Rudolf Steiner
Archive\</a\>
