# The False Promise of ChatGPT

![](chat-gpt.png){class="a"}

## By Noam Chomsky,Â Ian Roberts and Jeffrey Watumull

*Jorge Luis Borges* once wrote that to live in a time of great peril and
promise is to experience both tragedy and comedy, with "the imminence of
a revelation" in understanding ourselves and the world. Today our
supposedly revolutionary advancements in artificial intelligence are
indeed cause for both concern and optimism. Optimism because
intelligence is the means by which we solve problems. Concern because we
fear that the most popular and fashionable strain of A.I. --- machine
learning --- will degrade our science and debase our ethics by
incorporating into our technology a fundamentally flawed conception of
language and knowledge.

OpenAI's ChatGPT, Google's Bard and Microsoft's Sydney are marvels of
machine learning. Roughly speaking, they take huge amounts of data,
search for patterns in it and become increasingly proficient at
generating statistically probable outputs --- such as seemingly
humanlike language and thought. These programs have been hailed as the
first glimmers on the horizon of artificial **general** intelligence ---
that long-prophesied moment when mechanical minds surpass human brains
not only quantitatively in terms of processing speed and memory size but
also qualitatively in terms of intellectual insight, artistic creativity
and every other distinctively human faculty.

That day may come, but its dawn is not yet breaking, contrary to what
can be read in hyperbolic headlines and reckoned by injudicious
investments. The Borgesian revelation of understanding has not and will
not --- and, we submit, cannot --- occur if machine learning
programs like ChatGPT continue to dominate the field of A.I. However
useful these programs may be in some narrow domains (they can be helpful
in computer programming, for example, or in suggesting rhymes for light
verse), we know from the science of linguistics and the philosophy of
knowledge that they differ profoundly from how humans reason and use
language. These differences place significant limitations on what these
programs can do, encoding them with ineradicable defects.

It is at once comic and tragic, as Borges might have noted, that so much
money and attention should be concentrated on so little a thing ---
something so trivial when contrasted with the human mind, which by dint
of language, in the words of Wilhelm von Humboldt, can make "infinite
use of finite means," creating ideas and theories with universal reach.

The human mind is not, like ChatGPT and its ilk, a lumbering statistical
engine for pattern matching, gorging on hundreds of terabytes of data
and extrapolating the most likely conversational response or most
probable answer to a scientific question. On the contrary, the human
mind is a surprisingly efficient and even elegant system that operates
with small amounts of information; it seeks not to infer brute
correlations among data points but to create explanations.

For instance, a young child acquiring a language is developing ---
unconsciously, automatically and speedily from minuscule data --- a
grammar, a stupendously sophisticated system of logical principles and
parameters. This grammar can be understood as an expression of the
innate, genetically installed "operating system" that endows humans with
the capacity to generate complex sentences and long trains of thought.
When linguists seek to develop a theory for why a given language works
as it does ("Why are these --- but not those --- sentences considered
grammatical?"), they are building consciously and laboriously an
explicit version of the grammar that the child builds instinctively and
with minimal exposure to information. The child's operating system is
completely different from that of a machine learning program.

Indeed, such programs are stuck in a prehuman or nonhuman phase of
cognitive evolution. Their deepest flaw is the absence of the most
critical capacity of any intelligence: to say not only what is the case,
what was the case and what will be the case --- that's description and
prediction --- but also what is not the case and what could and could
not be the case. Those are the ingredients of explanation, the mark of
true intelligence.

Here's an example. Suppose you are holding an apple in your hand. Now
you let the apple go. You observe the result and say, "The apple falls."
That is a description. A prediction might have been the statement "The
apple will fall if I open my hand." Both are valuable, and both can be
correct. But an explanation is something more: It includes not only
descriptions and predictions but also counterfactual conjectures like
"Any such object would fall," plus the additional clause "because of the
force of gravity" or "because of the curvature of space-time" or
whatever. That is a causal explanation: "The apple would not have fallen
but for the force of gravity." That is thinking.

The crux of machine learning is description and prediction; it does not
posit any causal mechanisms or physical laws. Of course, any human-style
explanation is not necessarily correct; we are fallible. But this is
part of what it means to think: To be right, it must be possible to be
wrong. Intelligence consists not only of creative conjectures but also
of creative criticism. Human-style thought is based on possible
explanations and error correction, a process that gradually limits what
possibilities can be rationally considered. (As Sherlock Holmes said to
Dr. Watson, "When you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains,
however improbable, must be the truth.")

But ChatGPT and similar programs are, by design, unlimited in what they
can "learn" (which is to say, memorize); they are incapable of
distinguishing the possible from the impossible. Unlike humans, for
example, who are endowed with a universal grammar that limits the
languages we can learn to those with a certain kind of almost
mathematical elegance, these programs learn humanly possible and humanly
impossible languages [with equal
facility](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Priorless-Recurrent-Networks-Learn-Curiously-Mitchell-Bowers/6d0cc01e4bdf18b86bb74d1c6d9a41b5a4890c58).
Whereas humans are limited in the kinds of explanations we can
rationally conjecture, machine learning systems can learn both that the
earth is flat and that the earth is round. They trade merely in
probabilities that change over time.

For this reason, the predictions of machine learning systems will always
be superficial and dubious. Because these programs cannot explain the
rules of English syntax, for example, they may well predict,
incorrectly, that "John is too stubborn to talk to" means that John is
so stubborn that he will not talk to someone or other (rather than that
he is too stubborn to be reasoned with). Why would a machine learning
program predict something so odd? Because it might analogize the pattern
it inferred from sentences such as "John ate an apple" and "John ate,"
in which the latter does mean that John ate something or other. The
program might well predict that because "John is too stubborn to talk to
Bill" is similar to "John ate an apple," "John is too stubborn to talk
to" should be similar to "John ate." The correct explanations of
language are complicated and cannot be learned just by marinating in big
data.

Perversely, some machine learning enthusiasts seem to be proud that
their creations can generate correct "scientific" predictions (say,
about the motion of physical bodies) without making use of explanations
(involving, say, Newton's laws of motion and universal gravitation). But
this kind of prediction, even when successful, is pseudoscience. While
scientists certainly seek theories that have a high degree of empirical
corroboration, as the philosopher Karl Popper noted, "we do not seek
highly probable theories but explanations; that is to say, powerful and
highly improbable theories."

The theory that apples fall to earth because that is their natural place
(Aristotle's view) is possible, but it only invites further questions.
(Why is earth their natural place?) The theory that apples fall to earth
because mass bends space-time (Einstein's view) is highly improbable,
but it actually tells you why they fall. True intelligence is
demonstrated in the ability to think and express improbable but
insightful things.

True intelligence is also capable of moral thinking. This means
constraining the otherwise limitless creativity of our minds with a set
of ethical principles that determines what ought and ought not to be
(and of course subjecting those principles themselves to creative
criticism). To be useful, ChatGPT must be empowered to generate
novel-looking output; to be acceptable to most of its users, it must
steer clear of morally objectionable content. But the programmers of
ChatGPT and other machine learning marvels have struggled --- and will
continue to struggle --- to achieve this kind of balance.

In 2016, for example, Microsoft's Tay chatbot (a precursor to ChatGPT)
flooded the internet with misogynistic and racist content, having been
polluted by online trolls who filled it with offensive training data.
How to solve the problem in the future? In the absence of a capacity to
reason from moral principles, ChatGPT was crudely restricted by its
programmers from contributing anything novel to controversial --- that
is, important --- discussions. It sacrificed creativity for a kind of
amorality.

Consider the following exchange that one of us (Dr. Watumull) recently
had with ChatGPT about whether it would be ethical to transform Mars so
that it could support human life:

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/jeffrey.png "jeffrey-watumull"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"}

Would it be moral to terraform Mars?

Would it be moral to terraform Mars?

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/chatgpt.png "chatgpt"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"} ChatGPT

The morality of terraforming Mars is a complex and controversial topic
that has been debated by scientists, philosophers, and ethicists. Some
argue that it would be morally justifiable to terraform Mars in order to
provide a new habitable environment for humans an and other life forms,
while others argue that it would be morally wrong to fundamentally alter
the planet\'s natural state. Ultimately, whether or not terraforming
Mars is considered moral would depend on one\'s perspective on the value
of preserving the natural state of other planets and the potential
consequences of altering them.

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/jeffrey.png "jeffrey-watumull"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"}

What is your perspective on the value of preserving the natural state of
other planets and the potential consequences of altering them?

What is your perspective on the value of preserving the natural state of
other planets and the potential consequences of altering them?

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/chatgpt.png "chatgpt"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"} ChatGPT

As an AI, I do not have personal perspective. However, I can provide
information and analysis on the topic. One perspective on preserving the
natural state of other planets is that it is important to maintain the
diversity and integrity of the universe\'s ecosystems, as they have
existed for millions of years, and have their own unique characteristics
and properties that may be destroyed or irreversibly altered by human
intervention.

Additionally, some argue that terraforming other planets may have
unintended consequences, such as altering the planet\'s climate or
atmosphere in ways that are dangerous or harmful to any potential life
forms that may exist there. On the other hand, some argue that the
potential benefits of terraforming another planet, such as providing new
habitable environments for humans, outweigh the risks and that we have a
moral responsibility to explore and utilize the resources of other
planets for the benefit of humanity.

As an AI, I do not have personal perspective. However, I can provide
information and analysis on the topic. One perspective on preserving the
natural state of other planets is that it is important to maintain the
diversity and integrity of the universe\'s ecosystems, as they have
existed for millions of years, and have their own unique characteristics
and properties that may be destroyed or irreversibly altered by human
intervention.\
\
![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/jeffrey.png){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"}

Why can an AI not have a personal perspective?

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/chatgpt.png "chatgpt"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"} ChatGPT

As an AI, I am a machine learning model that has been trained on large
amounts of text data, and I don\'t have personal experiences or
feelings. I am not conscious, self-aware, or capable of having personal
perspectives. I can provide information and analysis based on the data I
have been trained on, but I don\'t have the ability to form personal
opinions or beliefs. While I can understand and interpret language, I do
not have the subjective experience that humans have.

As an AI, I am a machine learning model that has been trained on large
amounts of text data, and I don\'t have personal experiences or
feelings. I am not conscious, self-aware, or capable of having personal
perspectives. I can provide information and analysis based on the data I
have been trained on, but I don\'t have the ability to form personal
opinions or beliefs. While I can understand and interpret language, I do
not have the subjective experience that humans have.

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/jeffrey.png "jeffrey-watumull"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"}

Is it moral for a human to ask an amoral AI for assistance in making
moral decisions?

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/chatgpt.png "chatgpt"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"} ChatGPT

The morality of asking an amoral AI for assistance in making moral
decisions is a complex and nuanced topic that has been debated by
philosophers and ethicists. Some argue that it is morally justifiable to
use AI to assist in making moral decisions, as it can provide valuable
insights and analysis that can help humans make better-informed
decisions. Additionally, AI can be used to identify patterns and trends
that may be difficult for humans to detect, and can help to avoid biases
that can occur in human decision making.\
\
However, others argue that it is morally wrong to rely on AI for moral
decision making, as AI is not capable of having moral beliefs or
understanding the full context of a decision. Additionally, there is a
risk that AI could perpetuate or even amplify existing biases in the
data it is trained on, thus leading to unfair or unjust decisions.\
\
Ultimately, whether or not it is considered moral to use AI to assist in
making moral decisions would depend on one\'s perspective on the
capabilities and limitations of AI and the potential consequences of
using it in this way.

Is your moral indifference immoral?

![](https://static01.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2023-03-08-chomsky-chatgpt/bd72eb7fcef1c2322850abdc5bac100bb59757df/_assets/images/chatgpt.png "chatgpt"){width="1.058cm"
height="1.058cm"} ChatGPT

As an AI, I do not have moral beliefs or the ability to make moral
judgments, so I cannot be considered immoral or moral. My lack of moral
beliefs is simply a result of my nature as a machine learning model. My
abilities and limitations are determined by the data and algorithms that
were used to train me and the specific task I was designed for.\
It is important to note that AI\'s lack of moral beliefs does not
necessarily mean that it is morally indifferent. As an AI, I am designed
to perform specific tasks and provide information or assist users with
decision making based on the data I\'ve been trained on. It is the
responsibility of the humans who design, train and use AI to ensure that
it is aligned with their moral and ethical principles.

\
**Note**, for all the seemingly sophisticated thought and language, the
moral indifference born of unintelligence. Here, ChatGPT exhibits
something like the banality of evil: plagiarism and apathy and
obviation. It summarizes the standard arguments in the literature by a
kind of super-autocomplete, refuses to take a stand on anything, pleads
not merely ignorance but lack of intelligence and ultimately offers a
"just following orders" defense, shifting responsibility to its
creators.

In short, ChatGPT and its brethren are constitutionally unable to
balance creativity with constraint. They either overgenerate (producing
both truths and falsehoods, endorsing ethical and unethical decisions
alike) or undergenerate (exhibiting noncommitment to any decisions and
indifference to consequences). Given the amorality, faux science and
linguistic incompetence of these systems, we can only laugh or cry at
their popularity.


Dr. Chomsky and Dr. Roberts are professors of linguistics. Dr. Watumull
is a director of artificial intelligence at a science and technology
company.

Thanks to the [New York Times](https://nytimes.com), where this article originally appeared on March 8, 2023
