![](/goya-letter.jpg){class="a"}

# Letters to the Editor (SCR 155)

RE: [Anthroposophy -- An Introduction](https://southerncrossreview.org/155/fts-anthroposophy-introduction.html)

Dear Frank Thomas,

I love this!  It is plain speak yet appealing to the merely curious, the
keen novice and the well seasoned. How would you feel about me printing
and sharing it with others?  With you fully credited of course.  I do
prison outreach in Canada and when a prisoner requests info from us,
this would be a great addition to our package.

thanks for your consideration,

Raun

Raun Griffiths, steward
Anthroposophical Prison Outreach Canada (APOC)
<https://anthroposophy.ca/en/anthroposophical-prison-outreach-in-canada-2/>

> Dear Raun,\
> Of course! I would be honored if the article is used for such a good
> cause as yours obviously is.\
> Warm regards,\
> Frank

Many thanks ! 

I think a pamphlet format, staple in the middle, perhaps with a slightly
heavier paper stock for a \"cover\".  I\'ve been wanting something just
like this for a while now.  Some inmates just don\'t have the literacy
levels for getting through a Steiner lecture or book but will read
shorter articles.

Raun

\*\*\*

This is an excellent introductory summary to Steiner and Anthroposophy.
I have been studying his works off and on for about 50 years but still
consider myself a novice at best. The range of his works is immense and
often difficult to grasp as he presents topics over time from several
perspectives. I particularly liked your treatment of the threefold
society and The Philosophy of Freedom.

Suzanne and Alan Klimek

RE: [Basic Issues of the Social question -- Unresolved](https://southerncrossreview.org/155/fts-threefold.html)

Frank, Thank you for this wonderfully cogent and beautiful summary of
the social issues of our time, what is pathological in them, and the
possible remedies. If it is true that the Fundamental Social Law is, in
the social realm, the equivalent of a natural law in nature, then it
*will* be expressed. And violating it inevitably will have destructive
and inhumane consequences.

I would love to see an article by you considering this topic in light
of Polybius' anacyclosis (social cycles). If there will always be
individuals in any society who excel at accumulating wealth, and who
quickly learn how to employ that wealth to control state entities
(through economic forces) then where does one find practical
possibilities (and social forces) necessary for change? Mondragon and
Sekem come to mind.

Regards,\
John Fuller

St. Paul, Minnesota

\*

RE: [Breathe](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html)

This is so beautiful and made me cry. How many times I have found solace
 in nature growing up.  It is a special space to feel beauty, gratitude,
comfort, love and hope. And a place to truly appreciate oneself. 

I'll be looking for that book.

Esther Grummel, MSW, LICSW, CDP

\*\*\*

Every woman I have shared this with recognizes the truth in this.

I am almost 70 and it is as true to me today as it would have been 50
years ago.

Thank you.

Anna Jackson


RE: [Was Darwin Wrong?](https://southerncrossreview.org/154/cruse-darwin-wrong.html)

Whereas I agree with most of the essay, I believe some nuance has been
overlooked. Firstly, the characterisations of Darwinism as \'chance\' or
\'The Survival of the Fittest\' are not accurate. They are half-truths.

They place all emphasis on one side of a bivalent theory. It is chance
under constraint, an undirected activity in definite circumstances. In  
my view, this 2-value theory gives us the opportunity to lead out of
mechanism. For example, a respiratory virus is confronted by the
defences of the human immune system as soon as it touches the muscous of
the mouth and nasal passages. If the virus manages to penetrate into a
cell, and not be cleaned out before-hand, then it uses our bodies to
reproduce itself. Chance may alter the form of the virus. In turn this
change may induce a particular response by the wonderous immune system.

For the mechanist, what is to be seen is alternating mechanism. The only
person I have seen penetrating to this is Geert Vanden Bossche, though  
his descriptions of the evolution of covid-19 are so technical as to be
not understandable. He is as impenetrable as Hegel.

Because of the mechanistic atmosphere it was developed, in Darwinism
might have died out. But genetics was seen as the salvation of Darwin\'s
theory to mechanism. To this day, a medicinal or biological
investigation has to be reduced to molecular mechanism or else it is
just not \'scientific\'. People who have worked on the Human Genome Project,
such as Kevin McKernan, are beginning to see that a gene producing a
trait is not always an adequate explanation and there has to be more.  

But we\'ve got to alternation. Alternation becomes music. Music becomes
life and speech. Speech means a discussion, a colony of consciousness, a
spiritual community. It is agonisingly slow but there is change.

Kindest Regards,\
Maurice McCarthy

RE: [Roses Dressed in Black](https://southerncrossreview.org/155/theoharis-black-roses.html)

Thanks so much for publishing the article, "Roses Dressed in Black." the
amount of devastation, suffering, dying is almost too much to imagine. I
live in a safe place, but I am horrified reading all that has happened
in Gaza and in Israel-not just now, but for all of Israel's history. It
has to end. Gaza's must have a place for their children, for themselves,
free of Hamas, free of Israel.

I truly don't understand Biden's policies here. At this point, I will
not vote for him. Who can come forward to make a peace work? Bush made a
tremendous mistake by bombing the Middle East, now Biden has made the
same mistake, as has Israel. These choices are not the path to peace. We
are still in the mindset of destroy and conquer, kill or be killed.
Military boys games. It must stop, not just for the Middle East, but for
the world, the planet, the littlest baby, the oldest woman.

Barbara Fox

RE: [Libertad y la iglesia católica](https://southerncrossreview.org/76/steiner-catholicism-espanol.html)

Cordial saludo, importante escrito del maestro Rudolf Steiner, claro en
apreciaciones referente a la creación del dogma como la forma de
justificar principios católicos y como desentraña la ideología que
subyace para someter y tratar de negar y de opacar el avance de la
ciencia.

Pregunto: ¿Cómo respondemos hoy desde el pensamiento Waldorf a la
situación del mundo moderno?

Alonso Quiroz Q.

RE: [Decolonizing Stewardship: From Greed to Care](https://southerncrossreview.org/154/shiva-hafner-decolonizing.html)

Entiendo y comparto la mayor parte de los conceptos de Vanda. Lo q no
veo claro son los mecanismos p convertir esas ideas en una herramienta
universal de cambio dentro de los tiempos de existencia humanos.
Queremos vivir hoy, gozar de la vida hoy. Podemos invertir como ella
dice tiempo y compasión p cambiar, pero suena como un sacrificio
inacabable al paso q vamos.  Y hay q considerar también las enormes
asimetrías existentes en las diversas regiones y comunidades, en materia
de desarrollo integral

Horacio Bessone
