# The Magic Mound - Chapter 10 and 11

![](magic-mound-cover.jpg){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 10

### MARA LEADS THE BOYS TO THE RIOVITA

They walked in single file through the forest on their way to Urmaxa.
There was hardly any path to speak of because it hadn\'t been used in so
long. They were constantly turning to avoid fallen trees or dense
underbrush. Sergio lost his sense of direction and asked Mara to stop
for a moment.

\"How do you know we\'re still going in the right direction?\" he asked
her.

\"That\'s easy,\" she said. \"At the beginning of the day the sun is
over there.\" She pointed to the northeast, on their right. During the
day it rises in the sky until it is overhead and a little to the front
of us, then it crosses to the left and goes down.\" She described an arc
with her arm across the sky. \"So all we have to do is keep going in the
right direction in relation to the sun.\"

\"What if there is no sun?\" Divino, who was listening intently, asked.

\"No sun?\" Mara laughed. \"The sun is always there, except at night
when we sleep.\"

\"I mean when it\'s cloudy and we can\'t see it.\"

\"You wait.\" For Mara, who would never grow old and wasn\'t in a hurry,
waiting was not a problem.

\"Could we follow the moon at night the same way?\" Sergio asked.

\"I suppose so, but I don\'t know how. I never travel at night.\"

Mara walked more rapidly than suited the boys. She was more accustomed
to walking in the forest and had no trouble avoiding its pitfalls.
Sergio and Divino were scratched from low branches and bruised from
frequent trips and falls. The were glad they had tara-slippers which,
though very light, were strong and protected their feet. Platero walked
on without complaining. The first two nights the boys were so tired that
they didn\'t even have the energy to help Mara collect nuts and fruit
for dinner. But they ate very well before falling asleep at sundown.

It took them seven days to reach the Eastbridge. It was midday when they
arrived and everything was clear and bright.

The Riovita flowed swiftly under the bridge and Sergio wondered that
Alaram had been able to build it all by himself. The earth on the other
side of the river looked gray and hard. In the distance the mountains
rose, gradually at first, then steeply into high dark clouds.

\"Cross the bridge and stay on the path,\" Mara told them, but she stood
there as though trying to decide on what to say next.

Finally: \"By the way, there is a shorter path. It begins after you pass
a large flat rock. It may be hard to find, I don\'t know. They say it is
dangerous and should not be used, but no one remembers why.\" She
sighed. \"Well, I don\'t say you should use it, but at least now you
know it\'s there.\"

\"Yes, thanks,\" Sergio said, \"it might come in handy. And what if we
just follow the river to Maxalabora?\"

\"No!\" Mara answered emphatically. Terrible things live along the river
bank...\"

\"On both sides?\"

\"Yes, poisonous reptiles and there may even be a dragon.\"

\"A dragon!\" Divino cried. \"I\'ve never seen a dragon.\"

\"And pray you never do. Believe me, dragons are not at all nice to
meet.\"

\"Did you ever see one?\"

\"No, thank the God. I must leave you now, it is a long way back. I will
run the whole way and be there in half the time.\" Mara went over to
Platero, who had been munching juicy Maxanatara grass, and whispered
into his ear: \"Take good care of our little friends.\" Then she said to
the boys: \"Goodbye Sergio and Divino. I hope to see you back soon, and
with Mireya.\" She turned and ran into the forest.

\"We\'re on our own now, Divino, just you and me and Platero,\" Sergio
said.

\"And you\'re in charge, right?\"

\"Right. Come on, let\'s cross the river.\"

They walked over the Eastbridge and stood in Urmaxa looking up at the
mountains, which now seemed higher and more forbidding.

\"Something feels different here,\" Divino said.

Sergio frowned. \"I feel it too, as though the earth were moving, but it
couldn\'t be.\"

\"Do you think we should go back, Sergio.\"

\"Of course not, it\'s only your imagination.\"

\"But you feel it too.\"

\"I\'m old enough to know it\'s only my imagination.\"

Divino was reassured by his brother\'s confidence and followed him
willingly along a narrow path through foliage less dense than in
Maxanatara. Platero also felt the strange vibrations and held back, so
Divino led him by his silver collar. The path was clear and they had no
trouble following it. Soon it sloped upward however, which made walking
more strenuous. By the time the sun had sunk behind the western range of
the mountains they had emerged from the scant forest and were following
a mountain trail. There were more rocks than trees and the air was
noticeably cooler.

\"We better find a place to spend the night,\" Sergio said. \"It will
get dark very quickly here in the mountains.\" They halted and looked
around for a suitable camping place.

\"Sergio.\" Divino held his brother\'s arm and pointed with his other
hand to a large flat-topped boulder off to the right of the trail.
Sergio looked and saw a red glow on the side of the boulder. \"What\'s
that?\" Divino whispered.

\"I don\'t know.\"

Platero was using the halt to chew bark off the trunk of a tree. He
sensed the boys anxiety and followed their gaze to the boulder. He
stamped his hooves.

\"Let\'s go somewhere else,\" Divino said.

\"No. it\'s getting dark. Let\'s see what\'s making the rock glow. It\'s
flat, did you notice?\" He approached the bolder warily. The red glow
flickered on the boulder forming lively patterns. Divino and Platero
caught up with him and all three leaned forward to look around the
boulder. Imagine their surprise to see a fire and beside it a man with a
long white beard and pointed ears asleep under a thick blanket. Platero
brayed and the man woke up. His bushy eyebrows twitched over wide-open
blue eyes that rolled in wonder at the sudden apparition of two strange
boys and a white donkey. He threw off the blanket and sprang up,
revealing himself to be no taller than Sergio, and grimaced fiercely at
them.

### Chapter 11

### THE BOYS ENCOUNTER TAMOSHOT

> \"What\'s this? Who are you? the little man screamed. He ran to the
> other side of the boulder and returned immediately brandishing a thick
> cudgel. \"Now answer or I\'ll smash your heads in.\" The boys were so
> astonished that they were speechless.

\"Explain yourselves. My feet are getting cold.\"

\"Why don\'t you put your shoes on then?\" Divino said.

\"Don\'t try to trick me, I\'ll have none of that. Wait a mo, if you
promise not to jump me when I\'m not ready, I\'ll put me boots on before
me feet gets froze.

\"I promise,\" Sergio assured him.

\"What about you?\" the little man said, indicating Divino.

\"Oh, I promise too.\"

\"And that beast?\"

\"That\'s not a beast,\" Divino said, \"That\'s Platero. He won\'t hurt
you, unless you try to ride on him.\"

\"No thanks.\" The little man smiled for the first time and his face
cracked up into tiny wrinkles. \"The last time I tried to ride on a
beast back in the old country he threw me off and nearly broke me
crown.\" He picked up a pair of old boots from near the fire and sat
down on the blanket to put them on. His cudgel lay next to him, ready to
use should the boys or Platero change their minds. The boots were high
and he laced them almost up to his knees. When he finished he stood up.

\"Now, m\'lads, tell me who you are and what yer doin\' in this
god-forsaken place. You can warm yourselves at the fire if ye like.\"

\"We\'re not cold,\" Sergio said, \"but thank you anyway.\"

\"Not cold? With bare legs and them skimpy dresses on? What are ye made
of - wood? I\'m always cold in these blasted mountains.\"

\"That\'s because you don\'t have a tararobe,\" Divino said.

\"Tararobe?\"

Divino touched his: \"This.\"

The little man stretched his hands over the fire. \"Doesn\'t look like
it could warm a flea.\"

\"Oh, but it does, it\'s very warm,\" Divino said. \"And if it gets
really cold all we have to do is put on our silver belts.\"

\"Hmm.\" He sat on a corner of his blanket and wrapped the rest of it
around his shoulders. \"What are your names?\"

\"I\'m Sergio and this is my brother, Divino.\"

\"Where are you from?\"

\"Brazil.\"

\"And what\'s your name, sir?\" Divino asked.

The little man laughed. \"A fair question, m\'boy. It only depends on
which of my names you want.\"

\"The real one,\" Sergio said.

\"Real? They\'re all real. Never mind, call me Tamoshot, it\'s the one I
like best.\"

The boys stared at him and he smiled again. \"I\'ll tell ye my story,\"
he said. \"Ain\'t had no one to talk to around here for a longish
time.\" He shivered and pulled the blanket tighter. \"I came to Brazil
as a young sailor a mighty long time ago and got lost in Rio de Janeiro.
A woman deceived me. I shoulda known better because in all my lives
I\'ve been deceived at least once by a woman. Although come to think of
it I was a woman myself once in Egypt. Anyway, we went to Paraty where
we spent all my money and when I woke up one morning she was gone. I got
work clearing the forest but didn\'t like it so I quit. The boss said I
couldn\'t quit because of some contract I signed.\" He paused and ran
his fingers through his beard. \"You don\'t have some tobacco by any
chance, do you?\"

\"No, sir.\"

\"I didn\'t think so. It\'s just as well, I guess. Been carryin\' my
pipe around all these years without no tobacco to put in it. It\'s a
nice pipe though, see?\" He pulled a large, gracefully curved pipe from
his pocket and held it up for them to see. \"Why don\'t ya sit down
before ya fall down.\"

Sergio took two blankets from the saddle-bags and spread them on the
ground.

\"Awful thin blankets, them,\" Tamoshot said, eyeing them closely.

\"Yes, but warm,\" Sergio told him.

\"Wish mine was. Talkin\' about warmth, it got plenty hot on that job, I
can tell ya. Finally I decided to go off into the jungle and take me
chances. I walked around for a few days like a puppy without its mother.
Then I found a nice place to rest on a little hill, fell asleep and when
I woke up I was in Maxa.\"

\"The mound!\" Divino exclaimed.

\"You could call it a mound.\"

\"It\'s a magic mound.\"

\"You could say that too. Those women took one look at me and sent me to
here to Urmaxa.\"

\"why?\" Divino asked.

\"They said I was too old for Maxanatara.\" He put the pipe in his mouth
and drew on air, grimaced and put it back into his pocket. \"Since you
know about the hill..the magic mound, I guess you got here the same
way.\"

\"Yes, sir. We went to Maxanatara first, too,\" Sergio said.

\"Too many women there to suit me. I like it warm, but not *that
*warm.\"

The boys laughed and Tamoshot asked them why they had come to Urmaxa.
Sergio told him about their meeting with Queen Mamara and how she had
sent them to rescue Mireya. Then he asked Tamoshot what he did in
Urmaxa.

\"I travel around during the night,\" he answered sadly.

\"Do you follow the moon?\" Divino asked him.

\"Yes. The moon can be deceptive, like a woman, but since I\'m not going
anywhere anyway it don\'t matter none.\"

\"Why don\'t you travel during the day and follow the sun?\" Sergio
asked.

\"It\'s too cold for me at night, so the only way I can keep warm is to
keep movin\'. If it weren\'t for the cold I wouldn\'t move at all.
During the day I build a fire and sleep.\"

\"You could go to Maxanatara and hide from the women,\" Sergio said.
\"At least it\'s warm there.\"

\"I tried that but Mamara saw me in one of her dreams - nightmares, if
you ask me - and they sent me back again.\" His eyes flicked from one
boy to the other. \"Besides, the god doesn\'t like it.\"

\"Why not? You\'re not a Maxanian.\"

\"I am now.\" He stamped his feet to warm them.

\"Why doesn\'t the god want people to go to Maxalabora?\" Divino asked.

\"He has his reasons and there ain\'t no point in tryin\' to guess what
they are. Gods have mysterious ways and they\'ll never tell you their
reasons. At my age it\'s better not to go against his will.\" He
shivered.

\"But...\" Sergio began.

\"I\'m getting cold here, gotta start movin\'.

\"Is the earth moving?\" Divino asked him.

\"Vibrates now and then. You get used to it. I don\'t even notice it
anymore.\"

Sergio took the map Mamara had drawn for them out of a saddle-bag.
Platero was sound asleep and didn\'t wake up when Sergio opened the bag.
\"Maybe you can help us,\" Sergio said to Tamoshot as he opened the map.

\"I\'d like to, Sergio, but I can\'t concentrate when I\'m so cold. Now
if I had a tararobe like you it\'d be different.\"

\"We have extra ones, Sergio,\" Divino blurted out.

Sergio would have preferred not to mention the extra tararobes because
he wanted the have them available in case something happened to the ones
they were wearing. He also knew that it would be colder as they went
higher up into the mountains. He was a practical boy. Dona Ute said his
practicality came from his having been born under the sign of Virgo. But
now they were watching him, waiting for his answer.

\"Well, I guess we could spare one,\" he said. At least Divino would
have an extra tararobe.

\"How about them slippers you got on? Are they warm too?\"

\"I don\'t think they\'d fit you,\" Sergio said.

\"Oh, sure they will. I got feet like a wee lad. Here, I\'ll show you.\"
He started unlacing his boots again.

Sergio sighed. \"Give him a tararobe and a pair of slippers,\" he told
his brother. Divino took them from a saddle-bag and Platero woke up this
time. He watched along with the boys as Tamoshot undressed, in layers.
After shedding a thick sheepskin coat he slipped off a heavy sweater
only to reveal another one under it. The boys struggled to contain their
laughter as he took off his trousers and was found to be wearing another
pair under them. They burst out laughing when a third sweater and a
third pair of trousers were uncovered. Tamoshot continued to peel off
his many layers of clothing until he stood before them stark naked,
trembling like a leaf in the wind. The boys thought they had never seen
anyone quite so skinny, even in the favela. But Tamoshot was strong and
wiry. He threatened to smash their heads with his cudgel if they didn\'t
stop laughing at him. They stopped immediately. Divino handed him the
tararobe and he slipped it quickly over his head.

\"The slippers, quick,\" Tamoshot barked. The slippers were flexible and
fit any feet, which was lucky for Tamoshot because, contrary to his
claim, his feet were hugely out of proportion to the rest of his body.
The tararobe fit him like a tent though.

Sergio was about to protest when Divino offered him a silver cord, but
held his tongue when he realized that without a belt the little man was
in danger of being blown away by the first gust of wind capable of
carrying his weight; it would not have to be very strong. After Tamoshot
tied the belt around his waist he smiled and his deep-set, ice-blue eyes
gleamed like jewels in a wrinkled potato.

\"This is real comfy,\" Tamoshot said happily. \"I always wanted one,
but could never get me hands on one. Those Maxanians are stingy, not
like us Scots. Thank you, boys, maybe I can do you a favor some day.\"

\"You could help us with this map,\" Sergio reminded him.

Tamoshot frowned. \"I meant something important.\"

\"This is important to us.\"

\"All right, if you insist. Trouble with most people is they don\'t know
what\'s important and what\'s not. Let\'s have a look-see.\"

Sergio pointed to the path on the map. \"We must be about here,\" he
said, indicating a point not far from the Riovita. \"Mara said that near
a large flat rock that isn\'t on the map there\'s another path to the
Westbridge which makes the journey shorter. Is this the rock?\" - he
indicated the boulder next to them - \"and do you know where the other
path is, if it exists at all?\"

\"It is not on the map with good reason,\" Tamoshot said. \"If you try
to go by that path,\" he pointed to the area on the map just to the left
of their position, \"You will surely never reach your Mireya alive.

\"Why not?\" Sergio asked, very surprised.

\"Because if you deviate from this path in order to avoid the castle,
you will fall into a trap. There is a valley between the two paths over
which hang low poisonous clouds. Deadly rain falls continuously from the
clouds into the valley.\" He pointed to the sky behind them. \"Look, you
can see them there.\"

The boys looked to where Tamoshot was pointing with a gnarled finger and
could discern the clouds and, under them, a large black circle that
looked like an ugly smudge on a painter\'s pink canvas.

\"What castle?\" Sergio Asked.

\"Arman\'s castle, boy. What other?\" Tamoshot jabbed the map with a
dirty fingernail at a spot in the north. He said that the castle must
have been built after the Maxanians left Urmaxa, for it wasn\'t on the
map. It wasn\'t possible, he said, that they hadn\'t known of its
existence if it had been built before they left. Then he frowned.
\"Unless Mamara left it out on purpose so you\'d fall into a trap.

But Sergio was sure that wasn\'t the case. \"If she wants us to rescue
Mireya, why would she want us to fall into a trap?\" he said.

\"Good point, lad,\" Tamoshot agreed. \"That wouldn\'t make any sense.
Arman must have built the castle after they left. It\'s here on the
highest cliff.\" He felt for his pocket, but of course there was none in
the tararobe, so he retrieved his trousers and took the stub of a pencil
from a pocket. Then he deftly sketched a castle on the map while Divino
wondered out loud how rain could be poisonous, for in his experience
rain was something that washed clean and made things grow. Tamoshot
explained that the rain was not poisonous while it was in the clouds,
but that it passed through a layer of poisonous smog as it fell to the
ground and that the smog is formed by the emissions from the castle\'s
smokestack.

\"The rain absorbs the emissions and kills everything it touches on the
ground.\"

\"Who is Arman and what does he burn in the castle that is so terrible
that it kills everything it touches?\" Sergio asked

\"Arman says that he is Light\'s brother, but he is as dark and somber
as she is light and gay, so that\'s hard to believe. I don\'t know what
he burns and, frankly, I\'d rather not know. Both he and Light were once
the god\'s friends, some say they are his children, but they disobeyed
him. You know, the usual thing, wanted to share the power, I guess, and
now they work against him - and against each other, I might add.\"

\"Urmaxa isn\'t a very nice place, is it?\" Sergio said.

\"Nobody said it was, m\'boy. On the other hand, do you think it\'s much
better where you come from?\"

Sergio was about to say that there was no Arman\'s castle in Brazil, but
then he thought of the chemical factories in the valley between Sao
Paulo and Santos that pour out noxious yellow fumes. Dona Ute said that
the people who work and live there are being slowly poisoned. He didn\'t
answer tamoshot.

\"Arman guards a secret in the castle,\" Tamoshot said and looked
sharply at the boys.

\"A secret?\" Secrets fascinated Divino. \"What is it?\"

The little man laughed. \"If it were known it wouldn\'t be a secret.\"
He became serious again. \"If you could find out what the secret is you
could become rich...\"

\"Rich?\" Divino exclaimed.

\"In wisdom,\" Tamoshot added. \"It would help you find Mireya and even
set things right among the Maxanians.\"

Sergio asked him how they could find out the secret and Tamoshot said
that Arman would never reveal it, but that there was a raven in the
castle who knew the it.

You would have to find out where in the castle the raven is

kept and then, when no one is near, say to it the following:

*Raven, Raven, black as night,*

* Raven, Raven, hear our plight*:

*Gloom and shadow cloud our sight,*

Tell us how to reach the light.

Divino closed his eyes and repeated the words. Besides having good eyes
he had a excellent memory. \"Will the raven tell us the secret them?\"
he asked Tamoshot.

\"He will, for it will release him.

\"Is he enchanted?\"

\"Never mind that, just be careful,\" Tamoshot warned. \"But not so
careful that you don\'t accomplish what you set out to do. Everything
you do from now on is important, more important than you could possibly
realize.\" Tamoshot spoke in a different way now, not like the Scotch
sailor of a few minutes ago. Sergio noticed it but Divino didn\'t.
\"It\'s a pity that people don\'t recognize the importance of the things
they do, even the little things.\" He sighed. \"Well, I must be on me
way.\" Suddenly he went back to his old self. \"Good luck m\'lads, maybe
we\'ll meet agin on the bonny banks o\' the Riovita before this is
over.\" He gathered his things into a large bundle and started down the
trail.

Suddenly he stopped, turned and called, \"Thanks for the tararobe and
slippers.\" Then he continued on his mysterious journey.

\"I wonder if we\'ll ever see him again,\" Sergio mused as they waved
goodbye.

\"Oh, sure we will. He said so, didn\'t he?\"

\"He said *maybe*.\"

\"That\'s as good as for sure,\" Divino declared.

To be continued.

[Chapters 8 & 9](https://southerncrossreview.org/154/magic-mound-8-9.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle:

[The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)


and in Spanish at:
[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)
