# What is Waldorf Education?

![](shining-waldorf.jpg){class="a"}

## by Stephen Sagarin

**Introduction**  
  
Waldorf education does not exist. It is not a “thing,” and it cannot
necessarily be distinguished from good education anywhere. Because
it does not exist, it cannot be found in the boxes we call Waldorf
schools. To narrow its definition to identify it with schools named
Waldorf or Steiner schools, or to identify it with a particular
curriculum or technique is to reify Waldorf education in a way that
may describe part of what is but necessarily ignores what may also
be. What we call Waldorf education may perhaps be found in any
school, or anywhere that teachers teach and students learn. There is
no characteristic or quality that is unique to what we call Waldorf
education that cannot potentially be found somewhere else. Waldorf
education, as an idea or set of ideas, slips through the cracks of
any structure erected to define it.  
  
Just as Waldorf education has no definite boundaries, it also has no
definite origin. We may describe Waldorf education, for example, as
arising from the educational conceptions of Rudolf Steiner. But many
(most? all?) of these conceptions--for example, the idea that,
culturally, at least, “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny” (the
development of an individual mirrors in microcosm the development of
the species)--may be shown to be older than Steiner and therefore
not to originate with him. (Beyond inferences from Steiner’s work,
the idea that “the” Waldorf curriculum must include Norse myths in
fourth grade or Greek history in fifth grade--curricular practices
common in Waldorf schools--is difficult to discover. It’s not in
well-known lecture cycles that he gave on education, nor is it in
*The Study of Man* and its correlates, nor may it be found in
Stockmeyer’s or Heydebrand’s well-known descriptions of German
Waldorf school curricula.) In particular, for the United States, the
writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson contain in prototypical form many of
Steiner’s ideas about education.  
  
**Emerson and the Waldorf Curriculum**  
  
Emerson’s essay “*History*”, for example, presents an encapsulated
curriculum that mirrors closely the general curriculum of many
Waldorf schools. His language, too, mirrors Steiner’s in addressing
the intellectual and emotional maturation of one person as, in part,
a recapitulation of the intellectual and cultural developments to be
found in human history.  
  
The following quotations from “History” demonstrate the
correspondence that Emerson finds between history and individual
growth and development. This evolution of ideas is presumably based
on knowledge of ancient cultures or at least exposure to them.
Someone who had never heard of the Greeks, nor been exposed to their
cultural influence even in a dilute or adulterated form, could not
be expected in ontogeny to recapitulate this aspect of a cultural
phylogeny. On the other hand, as Emerson implies at the end of the
first two quotations, the state of being Greek, in the sense of “the
spiritual nature unfolded in strict unity with the body,” may be
universally human even for those who do not name it by the same name
as Emerson:

What is the foundation of that interest all men feel in Greek
history, letters, art and poetry, in all its periods from the
Homeric age down to the domestic life of the Athenians and Spartans,
four or five centuries later? What but this, that every man passes
personally through a Grecian period. The Grecian state is the era of
the bodily nature, the perfection of the senses—of the spiritual
nature unfolded in strict unity with the body. (123)

In many Waldorf school fifth grades, when teachers claim students
have achieved a grace and harmony of body and spirit that will soon
be disrupted by the travails of puberty and adolescence, the class
holds a Greek “Olympiad,” competing for laurels in javelin, discus
and running races, striving as much for form and beauty as for
victory. As well, Greek myths make up a significant portion of the
literature of the fifth grade in many Waldorf schools.  
  
The comparison between Emerson’s writings and Steiner’s is a study
in itself. One more example will suffice here. For both Steiner and
Emerson, the study of nature can guide and give meaning to personal
experience. Neither means by nature what we might call
“environmental studies,” although these would not be excluded; each
means that symbolic meaning may be found in the reflective
examination of the world around us.

It is essential that the secrets of Nature, the laws of life be
taught to the boy or girl, not in dry intellectual concepts, but as
far as possible in symbols. Parables of the spiritual connections of
things should be brought before the soul of the child in such a
manner that behind the parable he divines and feels, rather than
grasps intellectually, the underlying law on all existence. “All
that is passing is but a parable,” must be the maxim guiding all our
education in this \[elementary school\] period. (Steiner, 1965, 33)

Here is Emerson on the same topic:

I can symbolize my thought by using the name of any creature, of any
fact, because every creature is man agent or patient. Tantalus means
the impossibility of drinking the waters of thought which are always
gleaming and waving within sight of the soul. …Every animal of the
barn-yard, the field and the forest, of the earth and the waters
that are under the earth, has contrived to get a footing and to
leave the print of its features and form in some one or other of
these upright, heaven-facing speakers. (127)

Steiner’s thinking is often prefigured in Emerson’s, but this is not
to say that they are the same. Toward the end of his essay
“*Education*”, Emerson (1966) tosses in a towel that Steiner held
onto like a bulldog: “I confess myself utterly at a loss in
suggesting particular reforms in our ways of teaching.” (225)
Steiner, in concert with Emil Molt and a host of others, set out to
reform our ways of teaching in a myriad of concrete ways. But, while
broad and systematic, few or none of these ways were as original as
we might believe, nor were they meant to be particular to some
schools and not others.  
  
**A Unique Method?**  
  
Separate from the ideas in or behind Steiner’s conception of
education, we might describe Waldorf education as a particular
method. When we define method, however--and certainly in the case of
Waldorf education we are not talking about a collection of
techniques or a bag of tricks, but a method in a larger sense--we
omit important elements of Steiner’s thinking. As Michael Lipson,
recent translator of Intuitive Thinking as a Spiritual Path, put it,
somewhat cryptically, Steiner’s method is a “methodless method” that
must be continually re-invented by each teacher for each student in
order to be valid (Private communication, November 20, 1999). And if
we use a more mundane definition of method, and speak of a
particular curriculum or set of teaching techniques, Waldorf
education still eludes capture. Schools that are not Waldorf schools
and teachers who are not Waldorf teachers use, perhaps increasingly,
techniques and conceptions of education identical to those
propounded by Steiner, even though many of these teachers may never
have heard Steiner’s name. “Looping,” in which one teacher stays
with a particular class for several years, and block scheduling, in
which one subject is studied intensively for a relatively brief
time, are two such techniques. While no other school of which I know
even approximates the curriculum found in a typical Waldorf school,
there is nothing to prevent such adoption.  
  
**The Doctor Didn’t Say**  
  
One step toward recognizing that there is no such thing as Waldorf
education is to realize that Rudolf Steiner himself rarely spoke or
wrote about Waldorf education. The annotated bibliography of his
collected works lists only a handful of references to
“Waldorfschulpaedagogik,” “Waldorf School pedagogy.” He did speak
and write at great length about education; how children grow and
develop and learn, and how teachers may teach them. Further, in his
work, Steiner claimed no particular originality. He did not see a
discontinuity between what came before him and his own work. In his
seminal pamphlet, The Education of the Child (1965), for example,
Steiner quotes Jean Paul approvingly and at length. The sense one
gets reading Steiner’s work, and this applies as well to his
writings and lectures on matters other than education, is that
ideas, like apples, lead an objective existence, and may be plucked
by anyone. We might say that the “method” of Waldorf education is to
learn to pluck these apples for oneself, as student or teacher, and
not to rely on the authority of Rudolf Steiner to hand one
already-picked apples. The analogy holds in that we may no more
reify Waldorf education than we may divorce apples from the tree,
sun, soil of their birth. Ideas, like apples, exist in and arise out
of a context.  
  
**Staking a Claim**  
  
While I dispute the existence of “Waldorf” education, I do not
dispute the existence of a group of schools that have chosen to
identify themselves with the first Waldorf school in Stuttgart by
calling themselves Waldorf schools, or to identify themselves with
statements about education made by Rudolf Steiner by calling
themselves Steiner schools. These schools have had a life of their
own for more than seventy years in the United States, and have made
a powerful claim on the ideas lumped under the term “Waldorf
education.”  
  
I cannot define or describe Waldorf education well, but I can
investigate how others have defined or described it. I will begin
outside the United States to include some of what Steiner himself
said about what we now call Waldorf education. I will then focus on
the strategies that writers and teachers in the United States have
used to write about Waldorf education. (To see how Steiner’s
conceptions of education made their way from Germany and Switzerland
to the United States, see Ida Oberman’s study, 1999. 
[http://southerncrossreview.org/59/oberman-waldorf.htm](http://southerncrossreview.org/59/oberman-waldorf.htm)
Not available, unfortunately, is a similar account of the influence
of British Waldorf schools and teachers on the United States. This
is a study waiting to be written.)  
  
**Compromise**

Moreover, I should like to point out to you that the real aim and
object of our education is not to found as many schools as possible…
but our education concerns itself with methods of teaching, and it
is essentially a new way and art of education, so every teacher can
bring it into their work in whatever kind of school they happen to
be… and I have declared that the methods can be introduced into
every situation where someone has the good will to do it. (Steiner,
R. The Roots of Education, p. 30)

Some will acknowledge the validity of this passage but insist on a
distinction between those who employ a “compromised” version of
Steiner’s method (“Waldorf-inspired” schools or teachers) and “real”
Waldorf schools that have deliberately dedicated themselves to this
method. I maintain, however, that all manifestations of Rudolf
Steiner’s educational ideas are necessarily compromised. Schools
that see themselves as pure because they are independent of the
potentially corrupting influence of government money may be compared
with schools, like the Milwaukee Urban Waldorf School, a choice
school within the Milwaukee public school system, that have made
overt compromises to meet present requirements regarding the
separation of church and state. (One of these compromises has been
to eliminate the word “God” from a verse that children in the school
say each morning.) The Milwaukee school’s compromise is a deliberate
choice made in order to facilitate other educational objectives,
especially the education of relatively poor urban children.
Independent (non-public) Waldorf schools, on the other hand, have
clearly chosen, if not so deliberately, not to serve poor and
near-poor students like those who attend the Milwaukee school. This
choice is also a compromise.  
  
**Three of a Kind: Strategies and Descriptions**  
  
**A First Strategy: Waldorf Schools ARE Waldorf Education**  
  
Existing descriptions of Waldorf education can be characterized
according to three strategies. The first and simplest is to let
Waldorf schools stand for a description; what goes on in Waldorf
schools is inferred to be, by definition, Waldorf education. Ida
Oberman’s otherwise excellent history, Fidelity and Flexibility in
Waldorf Education, 1919-1998, slips into this mode, examining the
histories of Waldorf schools in Germany and the United States,
implying that these add up to a larger history of Waldorf education.
To further her discussion she uses the concept of a “cultural
field,” a metaphorical container for Waldorf education. Just as the
field is a metaphor, so too is Waldorf education.  
  
Stephen Talbott also uses this first strategy in an appendix to the
also otherwise excellent book The Future Does Not Compute. He asks,
“What is Waldorf Education?” and answers with a description of the
founding of the first school and a description of a generalized
curriculum. (424)  
  
If Waldorf education were a consistent and prescribed method and
curriculum, these analogies might suffice--although their definition
is circular. But what goes on in Waldorf schools varies from place
to place and time to time. There is no single characteristic, in
fact, without which a Waldorf school cannot exist, nor that defines
a school as a Waldorf school. Mentally erase beeswax crayons, or a
eurythmist, or even the morning verse. A school without these items
could still fulfill Steiner’s wishes for the education of children,
I believe. Waldorf education simply cannot be seen as the
accumulation or collection of some (even infinite) number of
defining characteristics. To indulge such a fragmented view is to
give credence to a reductionism that Waldorf education stands
against.  
  
**A Second Strategy: Pigeonholes**  
  
The second strategy is to pigeonhole Waldorf education according to
some cultural or historical characteristic that, while real enough
within a particular context, may not be necessary or sufficient to
describe something larger called Waldorf education. Waldorf
education is defined only partially if it is defined as a reform
movement, for example. To the extent that authors acknowledge the
contingency of such synecdochical definitions (definitions in which
the part stands for the whole), they may be serviceable, if
incomplete.  
  
**Henry Barnes and the Movement**  
  
Henry Barnes, author and long-time history teacher and faculty
chairman at the Rudolf Steiner School in New York City,
characterizes Waldorf education as a particular movement: “As one of
the most rapidly growing yet least known independent, nonsectarian
school movements in the free world today, Rudolf Steiner or Waldorf
education should be brought to the attention of all serious students
of education.” (323) This may be true, but Waldorf education is only
“independent” \[of public education in the United States\] and only
a “movement” in the here and now.  
  
Barnes writes, “This article will briefly outline the history of the
Waldorf movement and seek to give an introduction to the philosophy
and methods that underlie it.” (323) Philosophy and methods sound
promising; they may extend beyond consideration of Waldorf education
as a movement. For Barnes, the philosophy is based on two major
principles or insights. The primary or defining principle of Waldorf
education is an image of the human being:

Behind the Waldorf curriculum, its methods of instruction, and all
the many practical aspects one thinks of when one thinks of a
Waldorf school today stands the idea of man and of child development
from which they all spring. It is this idea that gives them meaning
and, in the end, is the basis on which the \[Waldorf education\]
movement will have to be evaluated and judged. (326)

To speak of the education of a child necessarily implies a concept
of what or who this child is. Historical examples abound, including
Locke’s “tabula rasa,” Rousseau’s good “natural man” Emile, Jonathan
Edwards’ very different “natural man” in original sin, and Dewey’s
concept of the child in community. For Barnes, Waldorf schools
attempt to educate according to Rudolf Steiner’s image of a human
being:  
  
In Steiner’s view, the human being can never be fully understood in
terms of his heredity and the impact of his environment. Beyond them
lies the essential core of human individuality, which cannot be
defined in material terms. That central entity, the human ego, is
perceived by Steiner to be supersensible and eternal, revealing
itself by reflection in the personality who is active here in time
and space. It is the educator’s responsibility to help this
personality to develop in such a way that it can become a fitting
vehicle through which the real ego can express itself. (326)  
  
Note that Barnes refers to “educators” in the last sentence quoted,
not to “Waldorf educators.” The virtual brand name “Waldorf” is a
label attached after Steiner, not by Steiner. The label “Waldorf”
represents an increasing objectification of ideas that were
initially less defined and therefore more open to play and
experiment than they often seem.  
  
The words “in Steiner’s view” and “perceived by Steiner” are almost
extraneous here. Steiner is certainly not the only nor the first
person to speak of a human being as more than the sum of genes and
environment. If he, and others who find the world this way, are
correct, then inferences regarding education follow not from
authority but from a perceived reality. Where reference to Steiner
should be inserted in the quotation above is in the last sentence.
“\[For Steiner,\] it is the educator’s responsibility...” Even here,
Steiner is not unique, although his lectures and writings certainly
constitute the most thorough and systematic approach to education
from this perspective.  
  
Barnes’ point is that the “supersensible and eternal” incarnate in
the world, according to Steiner, gradually and in a specific
fashion. Education, therefore, should be conducted in accordance
with what is known about this process of incarnation. Hence, the
methods and curricula derive from this view.  
  
For Barnes, a second principle grows from the first; because the
human self is seen to incarnate over a period of years, education
must address this development, which is seen to occur in three broad
stages lasting roughly seven years each. (Many writers on Waldorf
education treat these as if they were universal, when Steiner
himself made it clear time and again that he was describing
something that was historically and culturally true, not true
everywhere and for all time.) The method and curriculum similarly
derive from these principles, and provide the particulars visible to
any visitor to a Waldorf school, including instructional materials
and subject matter. These will likely include relatively featureless
rag dolls, beeswax crayons, watercolor paints, colored chalk,
stories of Christian saints, Norse and Greek Myths, and any number
of other things. But the rhetorical question still begs, does any of
these make a Waldorf school?  
  
Barnes’s consideration of methods and philosophy extends his
definition beyond the merely synecdochical, but his discussion here
speaks best to education in general, not to “Waldorf” education.  
  
**Oberman’s Objectification**  
  
Ida Oberman’s history of Waldorf education also offers an
objectified view. For her, “Waldorf” is a “unique” “German”
“progressive” “alternative” “reform initiative” or “institution”
which has “embedded” in it “an ideology, a belief system called
Anthroposophy.” All of these descriptions may apply to “Waldorf
education,” but each could change radically without disturbing
Steiner’s contributions to ways of teaching.  
  
Oberman locates sources for the curriculum of the first Waldorf
school in Steiner’s intellectual biography, but, having shown its
somewhat contingent nature, then treats it as an object to be
relocated wherever “Waldorf” roots. Oberman shows how different
people—Hermann von Baravalle, Marie Steiner and Ita Wegman—and
different schools—the Rudolf Steiner School in New York City, the
Kimberton Waldorf School, and the Sacramento Waldorf School—adopt
different strategies (“purity,” “accommodation,” and “evolution”),
but not how curricula reflect their origins in Steiner’s work and in
the time and place of their implementation.  
  
Among the evidence for this point of view is Oberman’s insertion of
the bracketed qualifier “Waldorf” into a quotation in which it did
not formerly appear: “The faculty now active at the school have
proven...their willingness to continue this \[Waldorf\] work, which
represents the noblest of German cultural life for all to see.”
(1999. Emil Molt and Duke Fritz von Bothmer, p. 134) It is clear
that Oberman sees the work as “Waldorf” work, but this is her own
objectification.  
  
**A Third Strategy: School Functions**  
  
A third strategy involves some function or group of functions that
Waldorf education performs (is claimed to perform). If the
difficulty of the last definition is that it is too narrow—what is
does not define what else may be—the difficulty of a functional
definition is that it is too broad. Good education of any kind will
necessarily perform certain functions that cannot simply be claimed
for, let’s say, Waldorf education. Waldorf teachers are not the only
teachers to claim a developmental view of their students, nor the
only to find some aspects of human individuality that cannot be
attributed solely to the interaction of heredity and the
environment. Further, it does not appear that there is some unique
set of functions that only something called Waldorf education
performs.  
  
**Eugene Schwartz’s Functionalism**  
  
For Eugene Schwartz, Waldorf education is a method, based on the
work of Rudolf Steiner, who “begins with a qualitative intelligence
that is unitary and suggests that the task of education is to
multiply it. If \[Howard\] Gardner’s theory concerns itself with
‘multiple intelligences,’ then Steiner’s approach might be called
‘intelligent multiplicity.’” (151)  
  
Further, Schwartz describes Waldorf education as a “‘will first’
pedagogy” or “methodology” that aims to “educate the child in
accordance with principles that ask us to honor and work with the
soul and spiritual nature of the youngster.” (157) While this sounds
vague, it is only his introduction into a more specific examination
of methods and techniques that teachers may use.  
  
As for setting these ideas in a context as large as that of Barnes
or Curran (see below), I don’t believe Schwartz sees this as a
helpful goal; his more immediately practical goal is to show how
Waldorf education can function to address the needs of children in a
particular place and time. That is, he is concerned with the “will”
education of children in wealthy industrialized countries.  
  
**A Look at the Map**  
  
Eugene Schwartz also approaches the function of Waldorf education by
analogy. Like a map, Schwartz posits, a curriculum can be understood
on three levels. The first, a global, geophysical map, remains valid
for centuries. For Schwartz, Steiner’s description of child
development is such a durable aspect of Waldorf education.
Development itself may change, but only slowly. School
subjects—history, math, and so forth—change more rapidly, and have
been modified significantly over the decades since Waldorf education
began. These are akin to a political map, which may change more
rapidly. An up-to-date road map, however, must “come alive every
day.” The clear advantage of Schwartz’ analogy is that it neatly
allows for both relatively unchanging and continually changing
aspects of Waldorf education. One danger of this view, however, is
that agreement on the unchanging aspects of the map may be perceived
as dogma—unchanging and therefore unquestioned. The history of
geology shows, however, that while the earth appears to change
slowly, our views and interpretations of that change can be revised
radically from one year to the next. The notion that Waldorf
education is a thing, however immaterial, has developed so
surreptitiously over the past decades that we have not noticed the
change. Our map has not changed much, perhaps, but we may be in
danger of mistaking the map for the thing itself.  
  
**A Quality of Education**  
  
Each of the strategies outlined above makes Waldorf education into a
thing, whether a material thing like a school, or an ideological
thing like a movement, or a mental thing like a function. Not all
writers on Waldorf education, however, resort to these three
strategies. Those who perceive Waldorf education not as a thing but
as a quality of education demonstrate a different possibility for
description.  
  
**Peter Curran on Waldorf Education**  
  
Peter Curran, graduate of Bowdoin College and long-time history
teacher at The Waldorf School of Garden City, adopts a strategy
similar to Barnes’s in describing Waldorf education, but then
ventilates it immediately to include, potentially, all schools, not
a particular subset. Following his retirement in the late 1980s,
Curran set down some of his ideas about Waldorf schools.
Particularly, he believed that there were four “essentials,”
“without which no school (by whatever name) is a Waldorf School and
with which any school is a Waldorf School.”

I. …As each child’s consciousness matures, it recapitulates the
cultural epochs of all Mankind. Waldorf education agrees with
Emerson when he says that all children go through a Greek period and
a Roman period, etc. There is, then, a proper time and method for
particular subjects to be taught.  
II. Since no one destroys what one loves, reverence, awe and respect
for the Earth should be fostered. An inkling of the spirituality of
the Earth then comes into being.  
III. The qualitative, as well as the quantitative, in all things
should be equally developed.  
IV. Above all, Man is known as a spiritual as well as a physical
being.

Curran’s statement poses a realism to Barnes’s nominalism in that
the enactment of these principles does not depend on the presence or
absence of the name “Waldorf.”  
  
Of Curran’s four principles, the first and last are potentially
controversial, while the middle two may be found in many classrooms
and schools. The first, the “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny”
statement, is probably the least familiar to most educators, and it
may be the most dated, arising out of Aristotle’s “Great Chain of
Being”. (See, for example, Lovejoy, 1936 and 1964) Few, if any,
schools other than Waldorf schools today organize themselves around
such a principle. Still, there is nothing to prevent them doing so
if they choose. (Nor, if Waldorf schools found a different central
metaphor, would they necessarily cease to be good schools.)  
  
Last, some contemporary interpretations of the anti-establishment of
religion clause of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution
might prevent Curran’s fourth principle from being overtly applied
in public schools, but the concept is hardly unique among
independent schools. Some Waldorf teachers may argue that principle
four may be found in many schools, but that Waldorf schools mean
something different by “spirit”. I’m not convinced of this, however,
and, in any event, it needn’t be so.  
  
**Douglas Sloan’s “Education of the Imagination”**  
  
Douglas Sloan, retired Professor of History and Education at
Teachers College, NY, worked diligently through writing and teaching
to present an open-minded approach to Waldorf education. In
Insight-Imagination, he describes Waldorf education sensitively in
his discussion of a larger “education of the imagination.” (211)  
  
Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1964) wrote of the “primacy of perception”:
“all consciousness is perceptual, even the consciousness of
ourselves… The perceived world is the always presupposed foundation
of all rationality, all value and all existence.” (13) For Sloan,
the faculty of “imagination” necessarily accompanies perception,
without which we would live in William James’ “buzzing, blooming
confusion.” For Sloan, imagination is not simply one faculty among
others—empathy or cognition, say–to be strengthened through an
enhanced curriculum. Imagination is the necessary wellspring of
human experience of the world:

…it is only through imagination that we have any knowledge
whatsoever. …The imagination, the image-making power of the mind
…shapes our everyday perception of the world, for there is no
perception separate from interpretation. (140)

Similarly to Barnes, Sloan describes Waldorf education according to
a conception of educational stages. After briefly examining Piaget
with regard to stages, however, Sloan qualifies his statements: “Any
conception of educational stages must… stand constantly ready to be
reevaluated and revised in the light of new evidence from any field
of research….” (212) For Sloan, Waldorf education does not approach
a faith, nor was it created ready-made by Rudolf Steiner, to be
preserved in perpetuity like a Colonial reenactment. “Such a
conception of education must as a whole remain open and subject to
revision….” (212) Waldorf education is an evolving model of
educational thinking, research and practice, and must be created
anew in each application if it is not to devolve into prescription
or dogma.  
  
**Nancy Parsons Whittaker’s Open Door Policy**  
  
Nancy Parsons Whittaker is a translator of Steiner’s work into
English and a founder and administrator of “www.bobnancy.com”, a
website devoted to Waldorf education. The paragraphs that follow do
not set forth a thing-like definition, but attempt to throw open the
doors of a somewhat cloistered “movement”:

I believe that the educational movement Steiner founded drifted very
far from its source the moment \[the act of\] founding schools
became more important than examining the quality of education the
children were receiving and working to really convey the approach to
other teachers in all manner of schools and situations. What we call
“Waldorf Education” has largely come to mean a set of curricula and
specific ways of introducing specific subject matter. This has
nothing (in my opinion) to do with the original intent, which was to
convey the attitude, the viewpoint toward the children and toward
society (any society) with which a teacher could fully meet the
physical, mental and spiritual needs of both the students and their
community.  
  
Any school is a Waldorf school if the intent of Steiner’s pedagogy
is being met within its halls. What was the intent? The intent was
to offer an education in a way that gave each child a fundamental,
true introduction into the foundation of his or her society while at
the same time enhancing that child’s ability to accurately perceive
life around him or her without damaging the child’s innate capacity
to be sensitively aware of the Creative Love behind the visible
world (whatever that capacity might have been, whether large, small
or nearly nonexistent—the teaching was not intended to train a
student’s spiritual vision, just not to damage what already
existed). The education was not intended to found schools separated
from their society at large nor was it intended to model a
particular belief system.  
  
These goals can be met in a wide variety of settings, with an
infinitely wide possibility of curricula, through the myriad
possibilities of human personality.

**A Necessary Lack of Definition**  
  
I used to have a bumper sticker that read “Waldorf Education” on two
lines, “Waldorf” above and “Education” below. I returned to
long-term parking after a research trip to discover that someone had
neatly sliced off the word “Waldorf”, who knows why, leaving a
narrow bumper sticker that read simply: “Education”. I started to
remove it but stopped. It’s still on my car.  
  
Those who aim deliberately not to objectify Waldorf education can
avoid the pitfalls of reification, synecdoche, or function. These
writers necessarily leave Waldorf education undefined, and
characterize it in refreshingly open terms. Waldorf education
becomes not a thing, not a kind or brand of education, but a quality
of education. And qualities, like colors, like the warmth of a
heart, may expand boundlessly.  
  
**Conclusion**  
  
Steiner relates the following anecdote about his time in the Waldorf
School: “Whenever I come to Stuttgart to visit and assist in the
guidance of the school, I ask the same question in each class,
naturally within the appropriate context and avoiding any possible
tedium, ‘Children, do you love your teachers?’ You should hear and
witness the enthusiasm with which they call out in chorus, ‘Yes!’
This call to the teachers to engender love within their pupils is
all part of the question of how the older generation should relate
to the young.” (1995)  
  
We are all older than some and younger than others; we learn from
some and we teach others. If we foster the relationship Steiner
describes here, then we participate in an education that honors the
memory of Rudolf Steiner.  
  
**References**  
  
Barnes, H. (1980) An introduction to waldorf education. In Teachers
College Record, 81 (3), Spring 1980; pp. 322-336,  
Curran, P. (1990) Unpublished typescript.  
Emerson, R. (1966) Education. In Emerson on education: Selections,
H. Jones (Ed.). Teachers College Press: New York.  
Lovejoy, A. (1936 and 1964) The great chain of being: A study of the
history of an idea. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964) The primacy of perception and other essays
on phenomenological psychology, the philosophy of art, history and
politics, J. Edie (Ed.) Chicago: Northwestern University Press.  
Oberman, I. (1999) Fidelity and flexibility in Waldorf education,
1919-1998. Ann Arbor: UMI Dissertation Services.  
St. Charles, Dorothy, interview by Alan Chartock, WAMC radio, 90.3
FM, Albany, NY, April 1994.  
Schwartz, E. (1999) Millennial child: Transforming education in the
twenty-first century. Anthroposophic Press: Hudson, NY.  
Sloan, D. (1983) Insight-Imagination: The emancipation of thought
and the modern world. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.  
Steiner, R. (1965) The education of the child in the light of
anthroposophy, G. & M. Adams (Trans.) Rudolf Steiner Press: New
York.  
Steiner, R. (1995) The fundamentals of waldorf education. November
11, 1921. In Waldorf Education and Anthroposophy 1: Nine Public
Lectures. Anthroposophic Press: Hudson, NY.  
Steiner, R. (1996) Why base education on anthroposophy? June 30,
1923. In Waldorf Education and Anthroposophy 2: Twelve Public
Lectures. Anthroposophic Press: Hudson, NY.  
Talbott, S. (1995) The future does not compute: Transcending the
machines in our midst. O’Reilly and Associates: Sebastopol, CA.  
Whittaker, N. (2001) Post to subscribers of the list server
Waldorf@maelstrom.stjohns.edu., Feb. 11. Subscribe at
http://www.bobnancy.com. Quoted with author’s permission.  
  
**Stephen Sagarin**, Ph.D., is Faculty Chair, cofounder, and teacher
at the Great Barrington Waldorf High School, MA, Associate Professor
in the M.S.Ed. Program in Waldorf Teacher Education at Sunbridge
College, NY, and Editor of the *Research Bulletin* of the Research
Institute for Waldorf Education. Dr. Sagarin has a Ph.D. in history
from Columbia University and a B.A. in art history and fine art from
Princeton University. He has taught history of education at Teachers
College, NY, and human development at the City University of New
York. He has been a Waldorf school teacher for most of his career,
including eleven years at the Waldorf School of Garden City, NY, the
high school from which he graduated.

<http://ssagarin.blogspot.com>
