# The True Nature of the Second Coming

## By Rudolf Steiner

![The Annunciation by Henry Ossawa Tanner](annunciation.jpg){class="a"}

#### Translated by D. S. Osmond and Charles Davy January 25, 2010 - GA 118

When someone has concerned himself for a time with the conception of the
world presented by Spiritual Science, and then allows the various ideas
and thoughts and items of knowledge that he gains from it to work upon
him, manifold questions arise, and he becomes more and more of a
spiritual scientist by linking such questions --- which are really
questions of feeling, of the heart, of the character, in short, of life
in general --- with spiritual-scientific ideas. The nature of these
ideas is such that they do not only satisfy our theoretical, scientific
curiosity but shed light upon the riddles of life, upon the mysteries of
existence, and they bear fruit in the real sense only when we no longer
merely reflect about and feel their import, value and meaning, but learn
under their influence to look differently at the world around us. These
ideas should warm us inwardly, should become impulses, forces of heart
and soul within us. And this is increasingly so when the answers
received to certain questions give rise to new questions, when those
answers in turn become questions followed by new answers, and so on. In
this way progress is made both in spiritual knowledge and in the
spiritual life.

A fairly long time will still have to pass before it will be possible
to speak of the more intimate aspects of spiritual life in public
lectures, but within our own Groups the time when this can be done
should be coming nearer and nearer. It is therefore inevitable that
new members may be taken aback or even shocked when they hear certain
things; but, after all, we should make no progress in our work if we
could not pass on to discuss more intimate questions of life on the
basis of spiritual-scientific investigation and knowledge. Therefore
--- although misunderstandings may arise in those of you who have been
concerned with the spiritual life for only a comparatively short time
--- we will consider certain of these more intimate facts of spiritual
knowledge again today.

Without doubt an earnest question will arise in us when we think about
the idea of *reincarnation*, of many earth-lives, not merely as an
abstract theory, but when we ponder deeply on the meaning and
implications of this fact of the spiritual life. The significant
answer given by reincarnation will be followed by new questions and we
may ask, for example: If the human being lives many times on earth, if
he returns again and again in new incarnations, what is the deeper
meaning of this? --- The usual answer is that by passing many times
through life we ascend higher and higher, experiencing the results and
fruits of earlier earth-lives in later ones, and thus making progress.
But that is still a rather general, abstract answer. It is only
through more exact knowledge of the whole purpose of earthly life that
we are able to fathom the significance of repeated incarnations.

If a person were to keep returning to an earth that did not change but
remained essentially the same, there would not really be much to be
learnt through successive incarnations. These incarnations are
important because, as we pass through each of them, we can learn new
things, have new experiences on the earth. Over short periods of time
this is not so clearly perceptible, but if, as Spiritual Science
enables us to do, we survey long periods, it becomes obvious that the
epochs of our earth differ essentially from each other in character,
and that we are continually passing through new experiences. But
something else, too, must be realised --- that these changes in the
life of the earth itself must be taken into account. If in a
particular epoch of earthly existence we neglect the opportunity of
experiencing and learning what that epoch has to offer, then, although
we return in a subsequent incarnation, we have missed something, we
have not assimilated what we ought to have assimilated in the previous
epoch. The result is that in the next epoch we are unable to make
proper use of our forces and faculties.

Speaking still in a quite general sense, it can be said that in our
epoch something is possible on earth, indeed over almost the whole
globe, that was not possible in the earlier incarnations, for example,
of men now living. Strange as it may seem, there is a certain, indeed
a great significance in this. It is possible in the present
incarnation for certain numbers of people to come to Spiritual
Science; that is, to assimilate the findings of spiritual
investigation which are available in the domain of Spiritual Science
today. The fact that a few human beings come together and receive the
knowledge discovered by spiritual investigation may of course be
regarded as of no importance, but people who hold this view do not
understand the significance of reincarnation, nor that certain things
can be learnt only during *one* particular incarnation. If they are
not learnt, something has been missed and will be lacking in the
following incarnations.

This above all must be realised: What we learn today in Spiritual
Science becomes part of our soul, and we bring it with us when we
descend again into the next incarnation.

Let us now try to grasp what this means for the soul. Reference will
have to be made not only to a great deal that will already be known to
you from other lectures and from your own reading, but to many facts
of the spiritual life that are more or less new or still quite
unfamiliar to you. It is necessary first to go back, as often before,
to earlier epochs in the evolution of humanity and of the earth. We
are living now in the fifth epoch following the great Atlantean
catastrophe. This epoch was preceded by the fourth, the Greco-Latin
epoch, when ideas and experiences of paramount importance of life on
earth originated among the Greek and Latin peoples. This fourth epoch
was preceded by the Chaldean-Babylonian-Assyrian-Egyptian period, this
by the original Persian and this in turn by the ancient Indian. In a
still more distant past we come to the great Atlantean catastrophe by
which an ancient continent extending over the area of the present
Atlantic Ocean was destroyed. This continent of ancient Atlantis was
gradually swept away and the solid earth on which we are now living
received its present configuration. In still earlier epochs preceding
the Atlantean catastrophe, we come to the civilisations and forms of
culture developed on Atlantis by the Atlantean races. And these
conditions were preceded by still earlier ones.

A survey of what is told by history --- it does not, after all, go
very far back --- may easily give rise to the belief (although this is
quite unfounded even for shorter periods) that conditions of existence
on our earth were always the same as they are today. That is by no
means so, for there have been fundamental changes --- most marked of
all in man\'s life of soul. The souls of those sitting here today were
incarnated in bodies belonging to all these epochs of earth-evolution
and they absorbed what it was possible to absorb in each of them. In
each successive incarnation the soul has developed different
faculties. Although during the Greco-Latin epoch the difference was
perhaps not quite as extreme, in the epoch of ancient Persia and even
more so in that of ancient India, our souls were entirely different
from what they are today. They were equipped with faculties of another
kind altogether in those olden times and lived under entirely
different conditions. And now, in order that what follows may be
thoroughly understood, we will visualise as clearly as possible the
nature of our souls after the Atlantean catastrophe, when they were
incarnated, let us say, in the bodies that could have existed on earth
only at the time of the ancient Indian civilisation-epoch. It must not
be imagined that this civilisation was to be found only in India
itself --- it was merely that in those days the Indian peoples were of
prime importance. The forms of civilisation differed all over the
earth, but they bore the stamp of the instructions given for the
ancient Indians by the Leaders of humanity.

When thinking of the nature of our souls in that epoch it must be
realised at once that knowledge of the kind possessed by men of the
modern age was then quite impossible. There was as yet no
consciousness of the self, no I-consciousness as clear and distinct as
that of today. The fact that he was an I hardly entered a man\'s
consciousness. True, the I, the "I", was already within man as a
power, a force, but knowledge of the I is not the same thing as the
power or activity. Human beings lacked the inwardness belonging to
their nature today, but instead of it they possessed faculties of
quite another kind --- faculties we have often referred to as those of
ancient, shadowy clairvoyance.

When we study the human soul during waking life in those times we find
that it did not really feel itself as an I; an individual felt himself
to be a member of his race or tribe, of his folk. In the sense that
the hand is a limb or member of the body, the single "I" or I stood
for the whole community of the racial stock and the folk. Man did not
feel himself to be an individual "I" as he does today; he experienced
the I as the folk-I, the tribal I. During the day he did not really
know that he was a man in the real sense. But when evening came and he
went to sleep, his consciousness was not completely darkened, as it is
today; the soul was able, during sleep, to be aware of spiritual facts
--- for example, of spiritual facts and happenings in its environment
of which the dream today is a mere shadow, in most cases no longer
representing their full reality. Men had such perceptions at that time
and they knew: There is indeed a spiritual world. The spiritual world
was a reality to them, not as the result of logical reasoning, not
through anything needing proof, but because every night, even if in
dim, dreamlike consciousness, they were actually within the spiritual
world. But that was not the essential. As well as sleeping and waking
life, there were also intermediate states during which man was neither
completely asleep nor completely awake. In those states,
I-consciousness was diminished even more than by day, but on the other
hand the perception of spiritual happenings, the dreamlike
clairvoyance, was essentially stronger than at other times during the
night. Thus there were intermediate states in which men had, it is
true, no I-consciousness, but were clairvoyant. In such states a man
was as if transported, entirely unaware of his separate identity. He
did not know: "I am a person". But he knew with certainty: "I am a
member of a spiritual world, and I know that it is a reality for I
behold it." Such were the experiences of human souls in the days of
ancient India. And in the Atlantean epoch this consciousness, this
life in the spiritual world, was even clearer; indeed very, very much
clearer \... We therefore look back to an age when our souls were
endowed with a dim, dreamlike clairvoyance which has faded away by
degrees in the course of the evolution of mankind.

If our souls had remained at the stage of this ancient clairvoyance,
we could not have acquired the individual I-consciousness that is ours
today; it would not have been possible for us to realise: We are
humans. We were obliged so to speak, to exchange our consciousness of
the spiritual world for I-consciousness, "I"-consciousness. In the
future we shall have both at the same time; we shall all attain that
state in which clairvoyance functions in the fullest sense while
I-consciousness is maintained intact --- as can only occur today in
one who has trodden the path of Initiation. In the future it will
again be possible for everyone to gaze into the spiritual world and
yet to feel himself a person, an I.

Picture to yourselves once more what has taken place. The soul has
passed from incarnation to incarnation; once it was clairvoyant, then
later on the consciousness of becoming an I grew clearer and clearer
and it was increasingly possible for the soul to form its own
judgments. As long as a man still has clairvoyant vision of the
spiritual world and does not feel himself to be an I, he cannot form
judgments or reason with the intellect. The latter faculty developed
steadily but with every succeeding incarnation the old clairvoyance
faded. The states in which man was able to gaze into the spiritual
world became rarer; he penetrated more and more deeply into the
physical plane, developed logical thinking and felt himself to be an
I.

We can therefore say that in very ancient times man was a spiritual
being, for he lived in direct intercourse with other spiritual beings
as their companion; he felt his kinship with beings to whom he can no
longer look up today with normal senses. As well as the world
immediately surrounding us there are, as we know, still other worlds,
peopled by other spiritual beings. With his normal consciousness today
man cannot see into these worlds, but in earlier times he lived in
them, both during the night-consciousness of sleep and in the
intermediate state of which we spoke. He lived within these worlds, in
communion with these other beings. Normally, this is no longer
possible for him today. He was, as it were, cast out of his home ---
the spiritual world --- and with every new incarnation became more
firmly established in this earthly world.

In the sanctuaries for the cultivation of the spiritual life, in
domains of learning and in the sciences where such things were still
known, account was taken of the fact that man had incarnated in these
different epochs of earth-evolution. Men looked back to a very ancient
epoch before the Atlantean catastrophe, when human beings lived in
direct communion with the Gods or spiritual Beings, and when their
inner life of feeling and sentient experience was naturally quite
different. You can well imagine that this was so in an epoch when the
soul was fully aware of being able to look up to the higher Beings,
knowing itself to be a member of that higher world. In considering
these facts we will remind ourselves that we can learn to speak and
think today if we grow up among human beings, for such faculties can
be acquired only through contact with men. If a child were to be put
on some lonely island today and grew up without having any contact
with human beings, he would not develop the faculties of thinking and
speaking.

This shows that the evolution of any being is to some extent dependent
upon the species of beings among whom it grows up and lives. That this
has an effect upon evolution can be observed in the case of animals.
It is well known that if dogs are removed from conditions where they
are in contact with human beings to places where they have no such
contact, they forget how to bark: as a rule the descendants of such
dogs cannot bark at all. Something does, then, depend upon the kind of
beings among which a being grows up. You can therefore imagine that
for the same souls to live among modern men on the physical plane is a
different matter from having lived at an earlier time among spiritual
Beings in a spiritual world into which normal vision today does not
penetrate. The impulses man developed when living among men and those
he developed when living among Gods were quite different.

Higher knowledge has always recognised these things, has always looked
back to that ancient time when men were in direct contact with
divine-spiritual Beings. And the effect of this contact was that the
soul felt itself a member of the divine-spiritual world. But this also
engendered impulses and forces in the soul that were still of a
divine-spiritual nature --- divine-spiritual in quite another sense
from that which applies to the forces of the soul today. When the soul
felt itself a member of the higher world, there spoke out of this soul
a will that also sprang from the divine-spiritual world --- a will of
which it might rightly be said that it was inspired, because the soul
was living among Gods.

Higher knowledge speaks of this age when man was still united with the
divine-spiritual Beings as the Golden Age, or *Krita Yuga*. It is an
age of great antiquity, the most important period of which actually
preceded the Atlantean catastrophe. Then came an age when men no
longer felt their connection with the divine-spiritual world as
strongly as during Krita Yuga, when :they no longer felt that their
impulses were determined by their life with the Gods, when their
vision of the spirit and the soul was already clouded. Nevertheless,
there still remained in them a memory of their life with the spiritual
Beings and the Gods.

This memory was particularly distinct in ancient India. It was very
easy in those days to speak about spiritual things; one could have
directed men\'s attention to the outer, physically perceptible world
and yet regard it as maya or illusion, because men had not been having
these physical perceptions for so very long. So it was in ancient
India. Souls then living no longer beheld the Gods themselves, but
they still beheld spiritual facts and happenings and spiritual Beings
of lower ranks. Only a comparatively small number of people were still
able to behold the sublime spiritual Beings, and even for these the
former living communion with the Gods was already much less intense.
The will-impulses from the divine-spiritual world had already
disappeared. Nevertheless, a glimpse into spiritual facts and
happenings was still possible, at all events in certain states of
consciousness: in sleep and in those intermediate states to which
reference has been made.

The most important facts of this spiritual world, however, which in
earlier times had been experienced as immediate reality, were now
there in the form of a kind of knowledge of truth, as something that
the soul still knew with certainty but which was now operative only in
the form of knowledge, as a truth. People still lived in the spiritual
world, but in this later age the realisation of its existence was not
as strong as it had formerly been. This period is called the Silver
Age, or *Treta Yuga*.

Then came the epoch of those incarnations when man\'s vision was more
and more shut off from the spiritual world, when his whole nature was
directed to the outer sense-world and firmly consolidated in that
world; inner I-consciousness, consciousness of humanity, became more
and more definite and distinct. This is the Bronze Age, or *Dvapara
Yuga*. Man\'s knowledge of the spiritual world was no longer as
sublime or direct as in earlier times, but something at least had
remained in humanity. It was as if in men of the present day who have
reached a certain age there were to remain something of the jubilance
of youth \... this is past and over but it has been experienced and
known and a man can speak of it as something with which he is
familiar. Thus the souls of that age were still in some degree
familiar with experiences leading to the spiritual worlds. That is the
essential characteristic of Dvapara Yuga.

But then came another age, an age when even this degree of familiarity
with the spiritual world ceased, when the doors of the spiritual world
closed. Men\'s vision was more and more confined to the outer material
world and to the intellect which elaborates the sense-impressions, so
that the only remaining possibility was to reflect about the spiritual
world --- which is the most unsatisfactory way of acquiring knowledge
of it. What men now actually knew from their own experience was the
material-physical world. If they desired to know something about the
spiritual world, this was possible only through reflection. It is the
age when man was most lacking in spirituality and therefore
established himself firmly in the material world. This was necessary
in order that he might be able by degrees to develop consciousness of
self to its highest point, for only through the sturdy resistance of
the outer world could man learn to distinguish himself from the world
and experience himself as an individual. This age is called *Kali
Yuga*, or the Dark Age.

I emphasise that these designations --- Krita Yuga, for example ---
can also be applied to longer epochs, for before the Golden Age man
experienced and participated in still higher worlds; hence all those
earlier ages could be embraced by this name. But if, so to speak,
demands are kept moderate and one is satisfied with the range of
spiritual experience described, the periods can be divided in the way
indicated. Definite time periods can be given for all such epochs.
True, evolution progresses slowly and by degrees, but there are
certain boundary-lines of which it can be said that prior to them
such-and-such conditions of life and of consciousness predominated,
and subsequently, others.

Accordingly, in the sense first spoken of, Kali Yuga began
approximately in the year 3101 B.C. Thus we realise that our souls
have appeared repeatedly on the earth in new incarnations, in the
course of which man\'s vision has been more and more shut off from the
spiritual world and therefore increasingly restricted to the outer
world of the senses. We realise, too, that with every incarnation our
souls enter into new conditions in which there are always new things
to be learnt. What we can achieve in Kali Yuga is to establish and
consolidate our I-consciousness. This was not previously possible, for
we had first to be endowed with the I .

If in some incarnation souls have failed to take in what that
particular epoch has to give, it is very difficult for the loss to be
made good in later epochs. Such souls must wait a long time until the
loss can in some respect be counterbalanced. But no reliance should be
placed upon such a possibility.

We will therefore picture to ourselves that the result of the doors
being closed against the spiritual world was of fundamental and
essential importance. This was also the epoch of John the Baptist, of
Christ Himself on earth. In that epoch, when 3,100 years of the Dark
Age had already elapsed, a fact of salient importance was that all
human beings ,then living had already been incarnated several times
--- once or twice at the very least --- in the Dark Age.
I-consciousness had been firmly established; memory of the spiritual
world had faded away, and if men did not desire to lose their
connection with the spiritual world entirely, it was essential for
them to learn to experience within the I the reality of the spiritual
world. The I must have developed to the stage where it could be
certain --- in its inmost core at least --- that there is a spiritual
world, and that there are higher spiritual Beings. The I must have
made itself capable of feeling, of believing in, the spiritual world.

If in the days of Christ Jesus someone had voiced the truth in regard
to the conditions then prevailing, he might have said: In earlier
times men could experience the kingdom of heaven while they were
outside their I in those spiritual distances reached when out of the
body. Man had then to experience the kingdoms of heaven, the kingdoms
of the spiritual world, far away from the I. This is no longer
possible, for man\'s nature has changed so greatly that these kingdoms
must be experienced within the I itself; the kingdoms of heaven have
come so near to man that they work into his very I. And it was this
that was proclaimed by John the Baptist: The kingdoms of heaven are at
hand! --- that is to say, they have drawn near to the I. Previously
they were outside man, but now they are near and man must grasp them
in the very core of his being, in the I. And because in this Dark Age,
in Kali Yuga, man could no longer go forth from the physical into the
spiritual world, it was necessary for the Divine Being, Christ, to
come down into the physical world \... Christ\'s descent into a man of
flesh, into Jesus of Nazareth, was necessary in order that through
beholding the life and deeds of Christ on the physical plane it might
become possible for men to be linked, in the physical body, with the
kingdoms of heaven, with the spiritual world. And so Christ\'s sojourn
on earth took place during a period in the middle of Kali Yuga, the
Dark Age, when people who were not living in a state of dull
insensibility but understood the nature of the times could realise:
The descent of the God to men is necessary in order that a lost
connection with the spiritual world may be established once again.

If at that time no human beings had been able to find a living link
with Christ in their hearts and souls, the connection with the
spiritual worlds would have been gradually lost; the kingdoms of
heaven would not have been received into the Is of men. It might well
have happened that if all human beings living at that crucial point of
time had persisted in remaining in darkness, an event of such
momentous significance would have passed them by unnoticed.

The souls of men would have withered, gone to waste, decayed. True,
even without Christ they would have continued to incarnate for some
time still, but they would not have been able to implant in the I the
power that would have enabled them to find the link with the kingdoms
of heaven. The event of the Appearance of Christ on the earth might
everywhere have passed unnoticed --- as it did, for example, in Rome.
It was alleged in Rome that a sect of sinful people were living in
some out-of-the-way, sordid alley, that among them was a wicked spirit
calling himself Jesus of Nazareth and inciting them by his preaching
to all kinds of villainous deeds. At a certain period that was all
that was known in Rome of Christ! And you may possibly also be aware
that Tacitus, the great Roman historian, wrote in a similar vein about
a hundred years after the events in Palestine.

Thus it was by no means universally realised that something of supreme
importance had taken place: that the Divine Light had shone into the
darkness of earth and that it was now possible for men to be brought
safely through the Kali Yuga. The possibility of further evolution for
humanity was ensured because there were certain souls who understood
what was at stake at that point of time and knew what it signified
that Christ had been upon earth.

If you were to transfer yourselves in thought to that time, you would
realise that it was quite possible to live without knowing anything at
all of the advent of Christ Jesus on the physical plane --- it was
quite possible to live on earth without having any consciousness of
this most momentous event.

Would it not also be possible today for something of infinite
importance to take place without men being aware of it? Might not our
contemporaries fail to have the slightest inkling of the most
important happening in the world at the present time? It might well be
so. For something of supreme importance is taking place, although it
is perceptible only to the eyes of spirit. There is a great deal of
talk about periods of transition; we ourselves are actually living in
a very important one. And its importance lies in the fact that the
Dark Age has run its course and a new age is beginning, when slowly
and by degrees the souls of men will change and new faculties will be
developed.

The fact that the vast majority of people are entirely unaware of this
need not be a cause of surprise, for it was the same when the Christ
Event took place at the beginning of our era. Kali Yuga came to an end
in the year 1899 and we have now to live on into a new age. What is
beginning is slowly preparing us for new faculties of soul.

The first indications of these new faculties will be noticeable in
isolated souls comparatively soon now, and they will become more
clearly apparent in the middle of the thirties of this century,
approximately in the period between 1930 and 1940. The years 1933,
1935 and 1937 will be particularly important. Very special faculties
will then reveal themselves in human beings as natural gifts. Great
changes will take place during this period and biblical prophecies
will be fulfilled. Everything will change for souls who are living on
earth and also for those who are no longer in physical bodies.
Whatever their realm of existence, souls are on the way to possessing
entirely new faculties. Everything is changing --- but the happening
of supreme importance in our time is a deeply incisive transformation
of the faculties of the human soul.

Kali Yuga is over and the souls of men are now beginning to develop
new faculties. These faculties --- because this is the purpose of the
epoch --- will of themselves draw forth from souls certain powers of
clairvoyance which during Kali Yuga had necessarily to be submerged in
the realm of the unconscious. A number of souls will experience the
strange condition of having I-consciousness but at the same time the
feeling of living in a world essentially different from the world
known to their ordinary consciousness. The experience will be shadowy,
like a divination, as though an operation had been performed on one
born blind. \... Through what we call esoteric training these
clairvoyant faculties will be attained in a far better form. But
because human beings progress, they will appear in mankind in their
very earliest beginnings, in their most elementary stages, through the
natural process of evolution.

But it might very easily happen --- indeed, far more easily now than
at any earlier time --- that men would prove incapable of grasping
this event of such supreme importance for humanity, incapable of
realising that this denotes an actual glimpse into a spiritual world,
although still shadowy and dim. There might, for example, be so much
wickedness, so much materialism on the earth that the majority of men
would show not the slightest understanding, and regard those who have
this clairvoyance as lunatics, shutting them up in asylums together
with those whose minds are obviously deranged. This point of time
might pass by without leaving a trace, although today we too are
letting the call of John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, and of
Christ Himself, again resound: A new epoch is at hand when the souls
of men must take a step upward into the kingdoms of heaven.

The great event might very easily pass without being understood by
men. \... If between the years 1930 and 1940 the materialists were to
say triumphantly: True, there have been a number of fools but no sign
whatever of the expected great event \... this would not in the least
disprove what has been said. But if the materialists were to win the
day and mankind were to overlook these happenings altogether, it would
be a dire misfortune. Even if men should prove incapable of perceiving
them, great things will come to pass.

One is that it will be possible for people to acquire the new faculty
of perception in the etheric world --- a certain number to begin with,
and they will be followed by more and more others, for mankind will
have 2,500 years during which to develop these faculties in greater
and greater perfection. This opportunity must not be missed. If it
were, this would be a tragic misfortune and mankind would then be
obliged to wait until a later epoch in order to retrieve the lost
opportunity and subsequently to develop the new faculty. This faculty
will consist in men being able to see in their environment something
of the etheric world which hitherto they have not normally been able
to see. Man now sees only the human physical body, but then he will be
able to see the etheric body at least as a shadowy picture and also to
perceive the connection between deeper happenings in the etheric
world. He will have pictures and premonitions of happenings in the
spiritual world and find that in three or four days' time such
happenings take place on the physical plane. We will see certain
things in etheric pictures and know that to-morrow or in a few days'
time this or that will happen.

These faculties of the human soul will be transformed. And what is
associated with this? The Being we call the Christ was once on earth
in the flesh at the beginning of our era. He will never come again in
a physical body, for that was a unique event and will not be repeated.
But He will come again in an etheric form in the period indicated. Men
will learn to perceive Christ inasmuch as through this etheric sight
they will grow towards Him. He does not now descend as far as the
physical body but only as far as the etheric body; men must therefore
grow to the stage where He can be perceived. For Christ spoke truly
when He said: "I am with you always, even unto the end of the days of
earth." He is present in our spiritual world \... and those especially
blessed can always see Him in this spiritual, etheric world.

A man who was convinced with particular intensity through such
perception, was Paul --- in the vision at Damascus. But this etheric
sight will develop in individual human beings as a natural faculty. In
days to come it will be more and more possible for men to experience
what Paul experienced at Damascus.

We are now able to grasp quite a different aspect of Spiritual
Science. We realise that it is a preparation for the actual event of
the new Appearance of Christ. Christ will appear again inasmuch as
with their etheric sight men will raise themselves to Him. When this
is understood, Spiritual Science is disclosed as the means of
preparing men to recognise the return of Christ, in order that it
shall not be their misfortune to overlook this event but that they
shall be mature enough to grasp the great happening of the Second
Coming of Christ. Men will become capable of seeing etheric bodies and
among them, too, the etheric body of Christ; that is to say, they will
grow into a world where Christ will be revealed to their newly
awakened faculties.

It will then no longer be necessary to amass all kinds of documentary
evidence to prove the existence of Christ; there will be eye-witnesses
of the presence of the Living Christ, people who will know Him in His
etheric body. And from this experience they will realise that this is
the same Being who at the beginning of our era fulfilled the Mystery
of Golgotha, that He is indeed the Christ. Just as Paul at Damascus
was convinced at the time: This is Christ! \... so there will be men
whose experiences in the etheric world will convince them that in very
truth Christ lives.

The supreme mystery of the age in which we are living is the Second
Coming of Christ --- that is its true nature. But the materialistic
mind will in a certain sense appropriate this event. What has now been
said --- that all the data of genuine spiritual knowledge point to
this age --- will often be proclaimed in the years immediately ahead.
But the materialistic mind corrupts everything today, and what will
happen is that this kind of thinking will be quite incapable of
conceiving that the souls of men must advance to the stage of etheric
sight and therewith to vision of Christ in the etheric body.

Materialistic thinking will conceive of this event as a descent of
Christ in the flesh, as an incarnation in the flesh. A number of
persons in their boundless arrogance will turn this to their own
advantage and announce themselves as the reincarnated Christ. The near
future may therefore bring false Christs, but anthroposophists should
be so fully prepared for spiritual life that they will not confuse the
return of Christ in a spiritual body, perceptible only to higher
vision, with a return in a physical body of flesh. This will be one of
the most terrible temptations besetting mankind and to lead men past
this temptation will be the :task of those who learn through Spiritual
Science to rise in the true sense to an understanding of the Spirit,
who try not to drag spirit down into matter but to ascend into the
spiritual world themselves. Thus we may speak of the return of Christ
and of the fact that we rise to Christ in the spiritual world through
acquiring the faculty of etheric vision.

Christ is ever present, but He is in the spiritual world. We can reach
Him when we rise into that world. All anthroposophical teaching should
be transformed within us into an indomitable will not to allow this
event to pass unnoticed but in the time that remains to us gradually
to educate human beings who will be capable of developing these new
faculties and therewith *to unite anew with Christ*. Otherwise, before
such an opportunity could again arise, humanity would have to wait for
long, long ages \... indeed, until a new incarnation of the earth. If
this event of the return of Christ were to be overlooked, the vision
of Christ in the etheric body would be restricted to those who are
willing to fit themselves for such an experience through esoteric
training. But the really momentous fact of these faculties being
acquired by humanity in general, by all men, of this great event being
understood by means of faculties developing naturally in all men \...
that would be impossible for long, long ages.

Obviously, therefore, there is something in our age that justifies the
existence and the work of Spiritual Science in the world. Its aim is
not merely to satisfy theoretical needs or scientific curiosity. To
prepare men for this great event, to prepare them to take their
rightful place in the epoch in which they live and with clarity of
understanding and knowledge to perceive what is actually present but
may pass humanity by without being brought to fruition --- such is the
aim of Spiritual Science.

It will be of the utmost importance to recognise and understand this
event of Christ\'s Appearance, for it will be followed by other
events. Just as other happenings preceded the Christ Event in
Palestine, so will those who prophetically foretold His coming follow
Him after the time referred to, after He Himself has become visible to
mankind again in the etheric body. The preparers of His coming will be
recognisable in a new form to people who have experienced the new
Christ Event. Those who lived on earth as Moses, Abraham and the
Prophets will be recognisable once again. And it will be known that
just as Abraham preceded Christ as a preparer, he also takes over the
mission, after Christ\'s coming, of being a helper in His work. Thus a
man who does not sleep through the event of supreme importance in the
immediate future gladly finds his way into fellowship with all those
who, as the Patriarchs, preceded the Christ Event; he allies himself
with them. The whole choir of those to whose level we shall thus be
able to rise is again revealed. The one who led mankind downwards to
the physical plane appears again after Christ and leads men upwards
again, unites them again with the spiritual worlds. \[See the
following lecture.\]

Looking far back into the past we come .to that point of time in the
evolution of humanity of which we say: from then onwards humanity
descends farther and farther away from the spiritual world into the
physical world. Although the following picture also has its material
aspect, it can nevertheless be used here. In earlier times man was a
companion of spiritual Beings and because his spirit lived in the
spiritual world he was a *son of the Gods*. But the soul, descending
ever more deeply into bodily incarnation, participated to a constantly
increasing extent in the outer world. The son of the Gods within man
took delight in the daughters of the earth, that is to say in those
souls who were drawn to the physical world. This in turn means: the
human spirit, in earlier times charged through and through with divine
spirituality, sank down into physical materiality, became the spouse
of the brain-bound intellect and by it was entangled in the web of the
physical world of the senses. And now the human spirit must re-ascend
along the path by which the descent was once made and become again a
son of the Gods. The human spirit which had become the son of man
would perish in the physical world if this son of man were not to
climb upwards again to the Divine Beings, to the light of the
spiritual world, finding delight in times to come in the daughters of
the Gods. It was necessary for the evolution of mankind that the sons
of the Gods should unite with the daughters of men, with the souls who
are fettered to the earth, in order that as the son of man the human
spirit should learn to master the physical plane. But it is necessary
that the human being of the future, the son of man, shall take delight
in the daughters of the Gods, in the divine-spiritual light of wisdom
with which he must unite in order then to grow upwards again into the
world of the Gods.

The *will* of man must be fired by the divine wisdom, and the most
powerful impulse for this will be if to those who have truly prepared
themselves the sublime ether-form of Christ Jesus becomes perceptible.
To a person in whom natural clairvoyance has developed this will be
like a Second Coming of the Christ Jesus, just as the etheric Christ
appeared as a spiritual Being to Paul. Christ will appear again to men
when they realise that they must use to this end the faculties with
which evolution itself will equip the human soul.

Let us therefore use Spiritual Science not merely to satisfy our
curiosity, but in such a way that it will make us worthier to fulfil
the great tasks and missions devolving upon the human race.

Answer given by Dr. Steiner to questions:

When light has been thrown, as it has been today, upon mysteries of a
more intimate kind, let us not treat them as thoughtlessly as certain
subjects are wont to be treated today, but realise that Anthroposophy
must be for us something altogether different from a theory. The
teaching has, of course, to be given; for how would it be possible to
rise to thoughts such as have been voiced today if they could not be
received in the form of teaching? The essence of this teaching,
however, is that it does not remain as such but is re-moulded in the
soul into qualities of heart and character, into an entirely different
attitude of mind, making different men of us. The teaching should
guide us how to make the right use of our incarnations so that in the
course of them we can develop into something quite different.

I have tried not to say a word too much or too little and have
therefore given only fleeting indications of matters of great moment.
But What has been said is of significance not only for the souls who
will be incarnated on the physical plane in the period from 1930 to
1940 but also for those who will then be in the spiritual world
between death and a new birth; souls work down from the spiritual
world into the world of the living, even though the latter may know
nothing of it. Through the new Christ Event, this communion between
souls who are incarnated here on the physical plane and souls already
in the spiritual world will become an increasingly conscious
communion. Active co-operation between human beings in incarnation and
spiritual beings will then be possible; this should already have been
indicated when it was said that the Prophets appear again among men on
the earth.

You have therefore to conceive that when these great times arrive in
the future there will be a more conscious mutual co-operation between
men in the physical world and in the spiritual world. This is not
possible today because of the absence of a common language. Here in
the physical world the only words men use in their languages designate
physical things and physical conditions. The world in which human
beings live between death and a new birth is quite different from the
world immediately surrounding us, and they speak a different language.
The Dead can take in only what is spoken in the sense of Spiritual
Science --- nothing else. Therefore in Anthroposophy we are
cultivating something that will be more and more intelligible to the
Dead and we are speaking also for those who are living between death
and a new birth.

Humanity is passing into a new era when the strength of the influences
from the spiritual world will steadily increase. The great events of
the immediate future will be perceptible in all worlds. Those, too,
who are living between death and a new birth will have new experiences
as the result of the new Christ Event in the etheric world. But if
they made no preparation in themselves while on earth, they would no
more understand the event than would men incarnated on the earth,
unless these had prepared themselves to respond in the right way. It
is essential for all souls now incarnated --- no matter whether they
will then still be in physical incarnation or not --- that .through
the assimilation of anthroposophical truths they should prepare
themselves for these important future events. If they fail to receive
into their earthly consciousness what Anthroposophy or Spiritual
Science has to give, they will have to wait for a new incarnation in
order to have the possibility here on earth of assimilating the
corresponding teachings. For there are things that can be experienced
and learnt only on earth.

Hence it is said that in the spiritual world there is, for example, no
possibility of knowing death --- and it was necessary for a God to
descend into the physical world in order that He might die. Knowledge
of what the Mystery of Golgotha is can be acquired in no other world
in the way that is possible in the physical world. We have been led
down into the physical world in order to acquire something that can be
acquired only there. And Christ came down to humanity because it was
only in the physical world that He could reveal to human beings ---
could enable them to experience in the Mystery of Golgotha ---
something that, having let its fruits ripen in the spiritual world,
carries those fruits onward. But the seeds must be laid down and
spread abroad in the physical world.

Golden Age --- Krita Yuga --- about 20,000 years\
Silver Age --- Treta Yuga --- about 15,000 years\
Bronze Age --- Dvapara Yuga --- about 10,000 years\
Dark Age --- Kali Yuga --- about 5,000 years\
Our Age embraces a future 2,500 years

Thanks to [Rudolf Steiner e.Lib](https://rudolfsteinerelib.org/)
