# Roses Dressed in Black

![](black-rose.jpg){class="a"}

### America\'s War Economy and the Urgent Call for Peace in the Middle East

## By [Liz Theoharis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/)

On September 19, 2001, eight days after 9/11, as the leaders of both
parties were already pounding a frenzied drumbeat of war, a diverse
group of concerned Americans released a warning about the long-term
consequences of a military response. Among them were veteran civil
rights activists, faith leaders, and public intellectuals, including
Rosa Parks, Harry Belafonte, and Palestinian-American Edward Said. Rare
public opponents of the drive to war at the time, [they
wrote](https://ips-dc.org/justice-not-vengeance-read-our-2001-statement-on-the-9-11-attacks/)
with level-headed clarity:

> "We foresee that a military response would not end the terror. Rather,
> it would spark a cycle of escalating violence, the loss of innocent
> lives, and new acts of terrorism... Our best chance for preventing
> such devastating acts of terror is to act decisively and cooperatively
> as part of a community of nations within the framework of
> international law... and work for justice at home and abroad."

[]{#anchor}Twenty-three years and more than two wars later, this
statement reads as a tragic footnote to America's Global War on Terror
that left an entire region of the planet immiserated. It contributed to
the direct and indirect deaths of [close to 4.5 million
people](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/05/15/war-on-terror-911-deaths-afghanistan-iraq/),
while costing Americans [almost \$9
trillion](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/cost-of/war/) and counting.

The situation is certainly different today. Still, over the last few
weeks, those prophetic words, now 22 years old, have been haunting me,
as the U.S. war machine kicks into ever higher gear following the
horrific Hamas massacre of Israeli civilians and the brutal
intensification of the decades-long Israeli siege of civilians in Gaza.
Sadly, the words and actions of our nation's leaders have revealed a
staggering, even willful, historical amnesia about the disastrous
repercussions of America's twenty-first-century war-mongering.

Case in point: recently, the United States was the only nation to
[veto](https://news.un.org/en/story/2023/10/1142507) the U.N. Security
Council resolution calling for "humanitarian pauses" to deliver
life-saving aid to Palestinians in Gaza. Instead, all but a [few
members](https://thehill.com/homenews/house/4276005-these-democrats-voted-against-resolution-backing-israel/)
of Congress are lining up to support billions more in military aid for
Israel and the further mobilization of our armed forces in the Middle
East. These moves, [experts
say](https://twitter.com/imetatronink/status/1715088591192481923?s=46&t=lFK_jhprIfUAeHP0Tf9SdQ),
may only accelerate wider regional conflict (something we are already
seeing glimmers of vis-à-vis Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen) at a time
of increasingly profound global instability. In the last few weeks, the
[U.S. Navy
has](https://cepa.org/article/huge-us-naval-force-off-israel-comes-with-costs/)
"assembled one of the greatest concentrations of power in the Eastern
Mediterranean in 40 years," while the Department of Defense is [readying
thousands](https://www.wsj.com/livecoverage/israel-hamas-war-gaza-palestinians/card/u-s-picks-troops-to-prepare-for-potential-deployment-to-middle-east-0pYNLxiZ7dmUbN6NxCML)
of troops for possible deployment. Meanwhile, college administrators are
suggesting
[student-reservists](https://twitter.com/jeannetheoharis/status/1714808818830319640?s=46&t=mZ2xQMEzkMP8JjX44bwwgw)
be prepared in case they get called up in the coming weeks.

Amid this frenzy of American bluster and brawn, the U.N. agency for
Palestinian refugees reports that Gaza is "[fast becoming a hell
hole](https://www.axios.com/2023/10/14/gaza-humanitarian-crisis-hamas-israel-war-death-toll),"
riddled with death, disease, starvation, thirst, and displacement.
Hundreds of scholars of international law and conflict studies have
warned that the Israeli military may already have launched a "[potential
genocide](https://twailr.com/public-statement-scholars-warn-of-potential-genocide-in-gaza/)"
of Gazans. At the same time, within Israel, citizen-militias, [armed
by](https://www.jewishpress.com/news/left-vs-right/ben-gvir-was-derided-for-efforts-to-fortify-civilian-communities-against-terrorist-attacks/2023/10/22/)
the far-right minister of national security, have escalated violent
attacks on Palestinians, only worsened by the acts of armed Israeli
settlers on the West Bank protected by that very military.

Finally allowing a tiny amount of aid across the Egypt-Gaza border,
after [shutting
down](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/gaza-cut-off-from-food-water-and-fuel-as-israels-punishing-bombardment-continues) all
food, water, and fuel for Gaza, Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant
[made it
clear](https://www.timesofisrael.com/liveblog_entry/gallant-we-cant-say-no-to-the-us-on-humanitarian-aid-given-how-much-they-do-for-us/)
just how much power the United States wields over this unfolding
humanitarian crisis. "The Americans insisted," he reported, "and we are
not in a place where we can refuse them. We rely on them for planes and
military equipment. What are we supposed to do? Tell them no?"

As Gallant implied, the U.S. could use its influence not only to demand
far more aid for Gazans, but to compel quite a different course of
action. There should, after all, be no contradiction between condemning
Hamas for its heinous slaughter in the south of Israel and denouncing
Israel for its decades-old dispossession and oppression of the
[Palestinian
people](https://www.newarab.com/news/july-august-1-palestinian-killed-day-israel)
and its now-indiscriminate killing and destruction in Gaza. There need
be no contradiction between decrying terrorism and demanding diplomacy
over violence. In truth, the Biden administration could use every
non-military tool at its disposal to pressure both Hamas and Israel to
pursue an immediate ceasefire, the full release of all hostages, and
whatever humanitarian assistance is now needed.

If only, rather than [further
militarizing](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/10/10/biden-pledges-military-aid-political-support-for-israel-amid-gaza-war)
the region or questioning the [death
toll](https://x.com/BeckyCNN/status/1717928315816731114?s=20) in Gaza,
the Biden administration were to focus on making this most recent and
ever more ominous crisis a final turning point, not for yet more
[brutality](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/sep/06/israel-imposing-apartheid-on-palestinians-says-former-mossad-chief),
but for a long-term political solution focused on achieving real peace,
human rights, and equality for everyone in the region. In this moment of
grief and rage, when tensions are at a fever pitch and the wheel of
history is turning around us, it's time to demand peace above all else.

**The Cruel Manipulation of the Poor**

While the U.S. government refuses to use its considerable power as
leverage for peace, ordinary Americans seem to know better. Unlike the
days after 9/11, recent polls suggest that a [majority of
Americans](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/israel-hamas-war-biden-opinion/)
oppose sending more weapons to Israel and support delivering
humanitarian aid to Gaza, including a majority of people under the age
of 44, as well as a majority of Democrats and independents and a
significant minority of Republicans. While Representative Rashida Tlaib,
the only Palestinian-American in Congress, was made a pariah and is in
the process of [being
censured](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/rep-marjorie-taylor-greene-files-censure-resolution-accusing-rep-rashi-rcna122329)
by some of her colleagues after her
[plea](https://www.newsweek.com/rashida-tlaib-refuses-back-down-1837183)
for a ceasefire, she actually represents the popular will of a
significant portion of the public.

And that, in turn, represents a generational shift from even a decade or
two ago. In the wake of this country's disastrous wars in Afghanistan
and Iraq, as well as dozens of other military conflicts globally, many
Americans, especially Millennials and Gen Zers, see the U.S. military
less as a defender of democracy than as a purveyor of death and chaos.
Nearly second-by-second online coverage of the Israeli bombing campaign
is offering Americans an unprecedented view into the collective
punishment of more than two million Gazans, [half of them 18 or
younger](https://www.npr.org/2023/10/18/1206897328/half-of-gazas-population-is-under-18-heres-what-that-means-for-the-conflict).
(Now, with limited Internet and
[communications](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/oct/27/gaza-internet-cutoff-israel-siege-casualties),
it's unclear how word of what's happening in Gaza will continue to get
out.) Add to that the slow-burning pain that has marked life in the
United States over the last 15 years --- the Great Recession, the
Covid-19 economic shock, the climate crisis, and the modern movement for
racial justice --- and the reasons for such a relatively widespread urge
for peace become clearer.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506473644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Today, half of all Americans are [either impoverished or one emergency
away](https://thehill.com/changing-america/respect/poverty/590453-survey-finds-over-half-of-americans-cant-afford-a-1000/)
from economic ruin. As younger generations face what often feels like a
dead-end future, there's a growing sense among those I speak to (as well
as older folks) that the government has abandoned them. At a moment when
the Republicans (and some Democrats) argue that we can't afford
universal healthcare or genuine living wages, the military budget for
2023 is [\$858
billion](https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/fy23_ndaa_agreement_summary.pdf)
and the Pentagon still [maintains 750 military
bases](https://www.democracynow.org/2023/2/14/david_vine_us_bases_china_philippines#:~:text=And%20indeed%2C%20the%20750%20U.S.,or%20people%20in%20world%20history.)
globally. Last week, without a touch of irony, Treasury Secretary Janet
Yellen, who [claimed last
year](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-11151469/Biden-told-NOT-cancel-student-loan-debt-Janet-Yellen-Jill-Kamala-pushed-him.html)
that student debt relief would hurt the economy,
[insisted](https://www.thedailybeast.com/secretary-of-treasury-janet-yellen-says-us-can-absolutely-afford-israel-ukraine-wars)
that the U.S. can "certainly afford two wars."

Millions of us tuned into President Biden's Oval Office speech on his
return from Israel, only the second of his presidency. There, he asked
Congress to earmark yet [another \$100
billion](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/biden-100-billion-request-congress-ukraine-israel/)
mainly for American military aid to Israel, Ukraine, and Taiwan (a boon
to the war-profiteering weapons makers whose CEOs will grow even richer
thanks to those new contracts). Just a year after Congress [killed the
Expanded Child Tax
Credit](https://www.npr.org/2022/01/27/1075299510/the-expanded-child-tax-credit-briefly-slashed-child-poverty-heres-what-else-it-d),
which had [cut official child poverty in
half](https://www.epi.org/blog/child-tax-credit-expansions-were-instrumental-in-reducing-poverty-to-historic-lows-in-2021/),
Biden's speech represented a further pivot away from socially beneficial
policymaking and toward further strengthening of the ravenous engine of
our war economy. After the speech, the _Nation_'s Katrina vanden
Heuvel
[offered](https://twitter.com/katrinanation/status/1715166075858407582?s=46&t=lFK_jhprIfUAeHP0Tf9SdQ)
this compelling instant commentary: "Biden tonight rolled out a version
of twenty-first-century military Keynesianism. Let's call his policy
just that. No more Bidenomics. And it consigns the U.S. to endless
militarization of foreign policy."

A decision to organize our economy yet more around war will also mean
the further militarization of domestic policy, with dire consequences
for poor and low-income people. Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., once
called such steps the "[cruel manipulation of the
poor](https://kinginstitute.stanford.edu/encyclopedia/beyond-vietnam),"
a phrase he coined as part of his denunciation of the Vietnam War in the
late 1960s. King was then thinking about the American soldiers fighting
and dying in Vietnam "on the side of the wealthy, and the secure, while
we create a hell for the poor."

Today, a similar "cruel manipulation" is playing out. For years, our
leaders have invoked the myth of scarcity to justify inaction when it
comes to widespread poverty, growing debt, and rising inequality in the
United States. Now, some of them are calling for the spending of
billions of dollars to functionally fund the bombardment and occupation
of impoverished Gaza and a violent Israeli clampdown in the West Bank,
not to speak of the possibility of a wider set of Middle Eastern wars.
However, polling numbers suggest that a surprising number of Americans
have seen through the fog of war and are perhaps coming to believe that
our nation's abundance should be used not as a tool of death but as a
lifeline for poor and struggling people at home and abroad.

**Not in Our Name**

In a time of stifling darkness, one bright light over the last weeks has
been the eruption of non-violent, pro-peace protests across the world.
In Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Europe, hundreds of thousands of
people have hit the streets to demand a ceasefire, including [possibly
half a million
people](https://x.com/PSCupdates/status/1718301978533515707?s=20) in
London. Here in the U.S., tens of thousands of Americans have followed
suit in dozens of cities, from New York to Washington, D.C., Chicago to
San Francisco. No less important, those protest marches have been both
multi-racial and multi-generational, much like the 2020 uprisings for
Breonna Taylor, [George Floyd](https://www.iwitnesssilwan.org/), and the
countless other Black lives lost to police brutality.

Recently, close friends and colleagues sent me photos from a [march in
Washington](https://www.jewishvoiceforpeace.org/2023/10/thousands-of-jews-and-allies-shut-down-capitol-hill/)
where [Jewish
protesters](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/10/19/jewish-activists-arrested-at-us-congress-sit-in-calling-for-gaza-ceasefire)
demanded a ceasefire and held up signs with heartrending slogans like
"Not in My Name," "Ceasefire Now," and "My Grief Is Not Your Weapon."
Ultimately, close to 400 people, including numerous rabbis, [were
arrested](https://www.commondreams.org/news/jewish-capitol-protest) as
they peacefully sang and prayed in a congressional office building,
while David Friedman, ambassador to Israel under President Trump,
hatefully
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/DavidM_Friedman/status/1713289253369614742?s=20):
"Any American Jew attending this rally is not a Jew --- yes I said it!"
Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia [ludicrously
claimed](https://www.msnbc.com/the-reidout/reidout-blog/marjorie-taylor-greene-israel-hamas-war-protest-rcna121494)
that they were leading an insurrection.

Two days later, my organization, the [Kairos
Center](http://www.kairoscenter.org/) for Religions, Rights, and Social
Justice, cosponsored a pro-peace march that drew a large crowd of
Palestinians and Muslim-American families. At noon, about 500
protesters, a gorgeous, multicolored sea of humanity [participated in
the Jumma call to prayer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I1fvwqouwb8)
in front of the U.S. Capitol. The following week, folks co-organized a
pray-in at New York Representative Hakeem Jeffries's office, using the
phrase "ceasefire is the moral choice." Faith and movement leaders
offered prayers from their various religious traditions and displayed
the names of people killed so far.

On October 27th, as Israel expanded its [ground
invasion](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/israel-hamas-war-gaza-civilian-deaths-un-says-possible-war-crimes/)
of Gaza, I joined thousands of people in Grand Central Station to call
for a #CeasefireNow, one of the [largest
demonstrations](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/27/world/middleeast/grand-central-protest-nyc-israel-hamas-gaza.html)
in New York since this most recent conflict broke out. Protests
continued all week. And on [November
4th](https://peoplesforum.org/events/national-march-on-washington-free-palestine/),
there was a mass rally and march in Washington, D.C., to call for an end
to war and support the rights of Palestinians, with hundreds of
organizations bridging a diversity of views and voices to plead for
peace.

Those marches were an inspiring indication of the broad coalition of
Americans who desperately want to prevent genocide in Gaza and dream of
lasting peace and freedom in Israel/Palestine. At the lead are
Palestinians and Jews who refuse to be used as pawns and prop-pieces by
military hawks. Alongside them are many Americans all too aware that,
though they might not be directly affected by the nightmarish events now
unfolding in the Middle East, they are still implicated in the growing
violence there thanks to their tax dollars and the actions of our
government. Together, we are collectively crying out: "Not in Our Name."

Such marches undoubtedly represent the largest antiwar mobilization
since the invasion of Iraq in 2003 and are weaving together diverse
communities --- young and old, Black, Brown, and White, Muslim, Jewish,
and Christian, poor and working-class --- in a way that should prove
encouraging indeed for a growing peace movement. Right now, there are
new alliances and relationships being forged that will undoubtedly
endure for years to come.

Yes, this remains a small victory in what's likely to prove a terrifying
global crisis, but it is a victory nonetheless.

**Roses Dressed in Black**

The last few weeks have resurrected traumatic memories for many Jews and
Palestinians globally --- of the Holocaust, the Nakba, and the long
history of Islamophobia, anti-Arab hate, anti-Jewish violence, and
antisemitism. For many of us who are not Palestinian or Jewish, the
recent mass death and violence have also triggered our own painful
reckonings with the past.

I'm a descendant of Armenian genocide survivors. When I was a child
growing up in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, I heard hushed tales of death
marches, hunger, lack of water, barricaded roads, and harrowing escapes.
Those stories remain etched into my consciousness, a mournful
inheritance my dispossessed ancestors handed down.

My great-grandfather, Charles Ozun Artinian, fled his home in what is
now Turkey's Seyhan River valley after the 1909 Adana Massacre in which
Ottoman militants killed 25,000 Armenian Christians. Part of his family
escaped over the Caucasus Mountains into Western Europe. They then
traveled halfway across the world to Argentina, because so many other
nations, including the United States, had closed their borders to
Armenian refugees and would only open them years later.

As he was fleeing Adana, Charles wrote a poem, one of the few surviving
long-form poems from the region at the time. It begins:

_"In the Seyhan valley there rises a smoke_

_Roses dressed in black, month of April cried_

_Cries of sadness and mourning were heard everywhere_

_Broken hearted and sad, everybody cried..."_

My family taught my siblings and me that although the genocide against
our people was carried out by the Ottoman Empire, it was made possible
by the complicity and indifference of the international community,
including the world's richest and most powerful nations. Right now, the
smoke rising over Gaza is suffocating and every additional hour the U.S.
enables more bombs to fall and tanks to rumble, more roses will be, as
my great-grandfather put it, dressed in black. Not only that, but with
the detonation of each new American-made bomb, the conditions for the
long-term freedom and safety of both Israelis and Palestinians are
blasted ever more into rubble.

Let us honor the memories of our ancestors and finally learn the lesson
of their many stolen lives: "Not In Our Name!," "Peace and Justice for
All!" and the
[pleas](../../../../../../../../../Users/tomengelhardt/Library/Containers/com.apple.mail/Data/Library/Mail%20Downloads/E1846969-97C7-424D-87C7-D6B69ADE847D/signal-2023-10-28-200338_002.jpeg)
from Gaza, including "Ceasefire Now!," "End the Siege," "Protect Medical
Facilities," and "Gaza is Home!"

Copyright 2023 Liz Theoharis

_Follow TomDispatch on _[_Twitter_](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)_ and
join us on _[_Facebook_](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)_. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, _[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)_ (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel _[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)_, and
Tom Engelhardt's _[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)_,
as well as Alfred McCoy's _[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)_,
John Dower's _[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
_and Ann Jones's_ [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Liz Theoharis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/)

Liz Theoharis,
a [_TomDispatch_](https://tomdispatch.com/everybody-in-nobody-out/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/everybody-in-nobody-out/),
is a theologian, ordained minister, and anti-poverty activist. Co-chair
of the [Poor People's Campaign: A National Call for Moral
Revival](http://www.poorpeoplescampaign.org/) and director of
the [Kairos Center for Religions, Rights and Social
Justice](http://www.kairoscenter.org/) at Union Theological Seminary in
New York City, she is the author of [_Always With Us? What Jesus Really
Said About the
Poor_](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0802875025/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
and [_We Cry Justice: Reading the Bible with the Poor People\'s
Campaign_](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506473644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
Follow her on Twitter at [\@liztheo](https://twitter.com/liztheo).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](tomdispatch.com)
