# The Gospel of Luke

![](luke.jpg){class="a"}

## by Rudolf Steiner

### Lecture 10

Basel, September 26, 1909 -- GA 114

Our task to-day will be to bring the knowledge gained in these lectures
on the Gospel of St. Luke to the culminating point indicated by
spiritual investigation --- the culminating point we know as the Mystery
of Golgotha.

Yesterday\'s lecture endeavoured to convey an idea of what actually took
place at the time when for three years Christ was on Earth, and the
preceding lectures indicated how the convergence of streams of spiritual
life made this event possible. The writer of the Gospel of St. Luke
gives a wonderful account of the mission of the Christ Jesus on the
Earth, as we shall realize if the light of knowledge derived from the
Akashic Chronicle can be brought to bear upon what he describes.

The following question might be asked: As the stream of Buddhism is
organically woven into Christian teachings, how is it that in the latter
there is no indication of the great Law of Karma, of the adjustment
effected in the course of the incarnations of an individual human being?
It would, however, be sheer misapprehension to imagine that what the Law
of Karma enables us to understand is not also implicit in the words of
the Gospel of St. Luke. It is indeed there, only we must realize that
the needs of the human soul differ in different epochs and that it is
not always the task of the great emissaries in world-evolution to impart
the absolute truth in abstract form, because at different stages of
maturity people simply would not understand it; the great pioneers and
missionaries must speak in such a way that people receive what is right
and suitable in a particular epoch. The teaching received by humanity
through the great Buddha contains, in the form of wisdom, everything
that in conjunction with the teaching of compassion and love and the
synthesis of this in the Eightfold Path, can enable the doctrine of
Karma to be understood. Failure to achieve this understanding only means
that no effort has been made to use faculties in the soul leading to
knowledge of the teaching of Karma and Reincarnation.

In the lecture yesterday it was said that in about three thousand years
from now large numbers of human beings will have progressed sufficiently
to unfold from their own souls the teaching of the Eightfold Path and
--- we may now add --- that of Karma and Reincarnation. But this must
inevitably be a gradual process. Just as a plant cannot unfold its
blossom immediately the seed has been sown but leaf after leaf must
develop according to definite laws, so too the spiritual development of
humanity must progress stage by stage and the right knowledge be brought
to light at the right time.

Anyone possessed of faculties that can be kindled by spiritual science
will realize from the voice of his own soul that the teaching of Karma
and Reincarnation is indispensable. It must be remembered however that
evolution is not fortuitous and in point of fact it is only now, in our
own time, that human souls have become sufficiently mature to discover
these truths through their own insight. It would not have been a good
thing reveal the teaching of Karma and Reincarnation exoterically a few
centuries ago; and it would have been detrimental to evolution if the
present content of spiritual science --- for which human souls are
longing and with which research into the foundations of the Gospels is
connected --- had been imparted openly to mankind a few hundred years
earlier. It was necessary that human souls should be yearning for it and
should have developed faculties able to accept such teaching; it was
essential that these souls should have passed through earlier
incarnations, even in the Christian era, and have undergone the
available experiences before reaching a degree of maturity capable of
assimilating the teaching of Karma and Reincarnation. Had this teaching
been proclaimed in the early centuries of Christendom in the form in
which it is proclaimed today, it would have meant demanding of human
evolution the equivalent of demanding a plant to produce the blossom
before the green leaves.

Humanity has only now become sufficiently mature to assimilate the
spiritual content of the teaching of Karma and Reincarnation. It is
therefore not surprising that in what has been imparted to humanity for
centuries from the Gospels, there is much that gives a quite erroneous
picture of Christianity. In a certain respect the Gospel message was
entrusted prematurely to men and it is only today that they are becoming
mature enough to develop all the faculties that could lead to an
understanding of the actual content of the Gospel records. It was
absolutely necessary that what was proclaimed by the Christ Jesus should
take account of the conditions and the attitude of soul prevailing in
those days. Therefore Karma and Reincarnation were not taught as
abstract doctrines, but *feelings* were cultivated through which human
souls would gradually become ready to receive this teaching. What was
needed at that time was to speak in a way that could lead by degrees to
an understanding of Karma and Reincarnation rather than any enunciation
of the teaching itself.

Did the Christ Jesus and those who were with Him speak in this way? In
order to understand this we must study the Gospel of St. Luke and
interpret it rightly. If we do so we shall realize in what form the Law
of Karma could be made known to at that time.

*Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed
are you who are hungry now, for you shall be filled. Blessed are you who
weep now; for you shall laugh. Blessed are you when people hate you, and
when they exclude you, revile you, and defame you for the Son of Man\'s
sake. Rejoice on that day and leap for joy for surely your reward is
great in heaven* --- i.e. in the spiritual worlds. ([Luke VI,
20--23.](javascript:void(0);))

Here we have the teaching of 'compensation'. Without going into the
subject of Karma and Reincarnation in an abstract way, the aim is to let
the feeling of assurance flow into the souls of men that one who for a
time is still hungering will eventually experience due compensation. It
was necessary that these feelings should flow into the souls of men. The
souls then living, to whom the teaching was given in this form, were
not, until they were again incarnated, ready to receive, as wisdom, the
teaching of Karma and Reincarnation.

What was to ripen in human souls had to flow into those at that time.
For a completely *new* epoch had begun, an epoch when men were preparing
to develop their I, their self-consciousness, to maturity. Whereas
revelations had hitherto been received and the effects made manifest in
the astral, etheric and physical bodies, the I was now to become fully
conscious, but be filled only gradually with the forces it was
eventually to acquire. Only one I, the Individuality of Zarathustra, who
came to the Earth as the Nathan Jesus could bring to fulfilment the
all-embracing Christ-principle.

The rest of humanity must now, in imitation of Christ, gradually develop
what was present for three years on the Earth in one single Personality.
It was only the impulse, the seed, that the Christ Jesus was able to
implant into humanity at that time and the seed must now unfold and
grow. To this end provision was made that at the right times there shall
always appear on Earth individuals able to bring the truth that humanity
will not be ready to assimilate until a later period. The Being who
appeared on Earth as Christ had to take care that His message would be
accessible to people immediately after His appearance, in a form that
they could understand. He had also to make provision for Individualities
to appear later on and care for the spiritual needs of human souls at
the stage of maturity reached in the course of time.

In what manner Christ made such provision for the ages following the
Event of Golgotha is related by the writer of the Gospel of St. John. He
shows us how, in Lazarus, Christ Himself 'raised', 'awakened', that
Individuality who continued to work as 'John', from whom the teaching
proceeded in the form described in the lectures on the Gospel of St.
John.
\[ [2](https://wn.rsarchive.org/GA/GA0114/19090926p01.html#Note2) \] But
Christ had also to provide for the appearance, in later times, of an
Individuality who would bring to humanity in a form compatible with
subsequent evolution, for which men would by then be ready. How an
Individuality was 'awakened' by Christ for this purpose is faithfully
described by the writer of the Gospel of St. Luke. Having declared that
he would describe what 'seers' endowed with the vision of Imagination
and Inspiration could say about the Event of Palestine, he also points
to what would one day be taught by another --- but only in the future.
In order to describe this mysterious process the writer of St. Luke\'s
Gospel has also included an 'awakening', a 'raising', in his account
([Luke VII, 11--17.](javascript:void(0);)) In what we read concerning
the 'awakening' of the *young man of Nain* lies the mystery of the
progress of Christianity. Whereas in the case of the healing of the
daughter of Jairus, to which brief reference was made in a previous
lecture, the mysteries connected with it were so profound that Christ
admitted only a few to witness the act and charged them not to speak of
it, this other 'raising' was accomplished in such a way that it might
immediately be related. The former healing was an act presupposing in
the healer a profound insight into the processes of physical life; the
latter healing was an 'awakening', an Initiation. The Individuality in
the body of the young man of Nain was to undergo an Initiation of a very
special kind.

There are various kinds of Initiation. In one kind, immediately after
the process has been completed, knowledge of the higher worlds flashes
up in the aspirant and the laws and happenings of the spiritual world
are revealed to him. In another kind of Initiation it is only a seed
that is implanted into the soul, and the individual has to wait until
the next incarnation for the seed to bear fruit; only then does he
become an Initiate in the real sense.

The Initiation of the young man of Nain was of this kind. His soul was
transformed by the event in Palestine but he was not yet conscious of
having risen into the higher worlds. It was not until his next
incarnation that the forces laid in his soul at that earlier time came
to fruition. In an exoteric lecture names cannot now be given; all that
is possible is an indication to the effect that the Individuality
awakened by Christ in the young man of Nain subsequently appeared as a
great teacher of religion; in later time a new teacher of Christianity
arose, equipped with the powers implanted into his soul in a previous
incarnation.

Thus Christ provided for the subsequent appearance of an Individuality
able to bring Christianity to a further stage of development. Moreover
the mission of the Individuality who had been awakened in the young man
of Nain is destined to permeate Christianity later on, and to an
ever-increasing extent, with the teachings of Karma and Reincarnation
--- teachings which when Christ was on Earth could not be proclaimed
explicitly as wisdom, because the human soul had first to receive them
into the life of *feeling*.

Christ indicates clearly enough (according to the Gospel of St. Luke
too) that an entirely *new* factor had now entered into the evolution of
humanity, namely, *self-consciousness*. He shows --- it is only a matter
of being able to read the meaning --- that in earlier times the
spiritual world did not flow into the self-conscious I, for people
received this spiritual stream through the physical, etheric and astral
bodies; a certain degree of unconsciousness was always present when, as
in previous epochs, divine-spiritual forces flowed into human beings. In
the stream in which the Christ Jesus was actually working, men had
formerly to receive the Law of Sinai, which could be addressed only to
the astral body. The Law was imparted to man in such a way that it did
indeed work in him, but not directly through the forces of his I. These
forces could not operate until the time of the Christ Jesus because it
was not until then that man became conscious of the I in a real sense.
This is indicated by Christ in the Gospel of St. Luke when He says that
men must first he made ready to receive an entirely new principle into
their souls. He indicates this when speaking of His forerunner, John the
Baptist. ([Luke VII, 18--35.](javascript:void(0);))

How did Christ Himself regard this Individuality? He said that before
His own coming the mission of John was to present in its purest and
noblest form the old teaching of the Prophets that had been handed down,
unadulterated, from bygone times. He regarded John as being the last to
transmit, in its pure form, the teaching belonging to *past* ages. The
'Law and the Prophets' held good until the coming of John the Baptist.
His mission was to set before men once again what the old teaching and
the old constitution of soul had been able to impart. How did this old
constitution of soul function in the times preceding the advent of the
Christ-principle?

Here we come to a subject --- incomprehensible as it may seem at the
present time --- that will some day become a teaching of natural science
as well, when it allows itself to be inspired to some extent by
spiritual science. I must now refer to a matter of which I can touch
only the very fringe but which will show you what depths spiritual
science is destined to illumine in the domain of natural science. If you
survey the branches of natural science today and perceive the efforts
that are made to penetrate the mysteries of man\'s existence with the
limited faculties of human thought, you will find it stated that the
*whole* human being comes into existence through the intermingling of
the male and female seeds. One of the basic endeavours of modern natural
science is to establish this theory. Microscopic examination of
substances is made in order to ascertain which particular attributes
proceed from the male or from the female seed, and the researchers are
satisfied when they believe, it can be proved that the whole human being
is thus produced. But natural science itself will eventually be
compelled to recognize that only *one* part of the human being is
determined by the intermixing of the male and female seeds and that
however precisely the product of the one or the other may be known, the
whole nature of man in the present cycle of evolution cannot be
explained by this intermixing.

There is in every human being something that does not arise from the
seed but is, so to speak, a 'virgin birth', something that flows into
the process of germination from a quite different source. Something
unites with the seed of the human being that is not derived from father
and mother, yet belongs to and is destined for him --- something that is
poured into his I and can be ennobled through the Christ-principle. What
in the human being which unites with the Christ-principle in the course
of evolution is 'virgin-born' and --- as natural science will one day
come to recognize through its own methods --- is connected with the
momentous transition accomplished at the time of Christ Jesus. Before
the Christ Event there could be nothing that did not enter into man\'s
*inner* being by way of the seed. Something has actually happened in the
course of the ages to bring about a change in the development of the I.
Humanity has not been the same since the Christ Event; but the element
that has been added since then to what is produced by the seeds must be
gradually developed and ennobled by assimilating the Christ-principle.

We are here approaching a very subtle truth. To anyone conversant with
modern natural science it is extremely interesting that already today
there are domains where investigators are faced with the fact that there
is something in man *not* derived from the seed. The preliminary
conditions for realizing this are already there, only the investigators
are not yet capable of recognizing what is present in their own
experiments and observations. More is at work in the experiments than is
known to modern natural science and little progress would be made if it
were entirely dependent upon the ability of the investigators. While one
or another is working in a laboratory, in a clinic, or perhaps in his
own study, there stand behind him the Powers which direct and guide the
world, and these Powers allow that to come to light which the researcher
himself does not understand and for which he is merely the instrument.
It is therefore also true that even objective investigation is guided by
the 'Masters', that is, by higher Individualities. The facts now
indicated are not usually observed; but they certainly will be when the
conscious faculties of researchers are permeated by the spiritual
teachings of Anthroposophy.

As a result of the fact of which I have just spoken, a great change has
taken place in connection with the faculties of the human being since
Christ came to the Earth. Previously, the only faculties available to
man were those derived from the paternal and maternal seeds, for these
faculties alone were able to develop in him. Between birth and death we
develop through our physical, etheric and astral bodies such faculties
as we possess. Before the time of Christ Jesus the instruments employed
by man for his own life could be developed only from the seed. After the
appearance of Christ Jesus that element was added which is of 'virgin
birth' and does not in any sense arise from the seed. This element can
of course be gravely impaired if a person is entirely given over to
materialistic thought; but it can be sublimated if he lets his being be
suffused by the warmth issuing from the Christ-principle and he then
brings it into his following incarnations in an ever higher and higher
form.

What has now been said necessarily implies that in all the proclamations
made to humanity prior to that of Christ, there was an element bound up
with faculties originating from the line of descent and from the seed;
and it also imparts the conviction that the Christ Jesus addressed
himself to faculties that have nothing to do with the seed arising from
the Earth but from the divine worlds uniting with the seed. Teachers
before the Christ Jesus could speak only by using the faculties
transmitted to their earthly nature through the seed. All the prophets
and forerunners, however exalted, even when they descended as
Bodhisattvas, were obliged to use faculties transmitted by way of the
seed. Christ Jesus, however, spoke to that in man which does *not* pass
through the seed but comes from the realm of the Divine. He indicates
this when He speaks to His disciples of John the Baptist ([Luke VII,
28](javascript:void(0);)): \"For I say unto you, among those that are
born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist\" ---
that is to say, among those who, as they stand before us, can be
explained as having come into existence through physical birth from male
and female seeds. But then Christ adds words to the effect that the
smallest part of that which is not born of women and which unites with
the man from the kingdom of God is *greater* than John. Such are the
depths hidden beneath these words! Some day, when study of the Bible is
illumined by spiritual science, it will be found to contain
physiological truths of far greater significance than any finding of the
blundering thinking applied in modern physiology. Words such as those
just quoted can lead to recognition of one of the very deepest
physiological truths. Profound indeed is the Bible when it is truly
understood!

Christ Jesus exemplifies in manifold ways, and also in a different form,
what I have now told you. His purpose is to indicate that the element
which is to come into the world through Him is something altogether new,
a truth differing from any hitherto proclaimed, because it is connected
with faculties derived from the kingdoms of Heaven --- faculties that
have *not* been inherited. He points out how difficult it is for men to
learn to understand such a teaching, and that they will demand to be
convinced in the same way as formerly. He tells them that they cannot be
convinced in the old way of the new truth that has now come; for what
could be proof of truth in the old form could not bring conviction of
the new. The old truth was presented in comprehensible form when
symbolized by the 'Sign of Jonah'. This symbolized the old way in which
man gradually attained knowledge and penetrated into the spiritual
world, or how --- to use biblical terms --- he became a 'Prophet'.

The old way of attaining Initiation was this: first the soul was brought
to maturity and every necessary preparation made; then a condition
lasting for three-and-a-half days was induced in the candidate, a
condition in which he was completely withdrawn from the outer world and
from the organs through which that world is perceived. Those who were to
be led into the spiritual world were carefully prepared and their souls
trained in knowledge of the spiritual life; then they were withdrawn
from the world for three-and-a-half days, being taken to a place where
they could perceive nothing through their external senses and where
their bodies lay in a deathlike condition; after three-and-a-half days
their souls were summoned back again into the body and they were
awakened. Such men were then able to remember their vision of the
spiritual worlds and to testify of those worlds. The great secret of
Initiation was that the soul, prepared by long training, was led out of
the body for three-and-a-half days into an entirely different world, was
shut off from the environment and penetrated into the spiritual world.
People who could bear witness to the realities of the spiritual world
were always to be found among the peoples; they were men who had
undergone the experience referred to in the Bible in the story of
Jonah\'s sojourn in the whale. Such a man was made ready to undergo this
experience and then, when he appeared before the people as an Initiate
of the old order, he bore upon him the 'sign of Jonah' the sign of those
who were able themselves to testify of the spiritual world.

This was the one form of Initiation. Christ said, in effect: 'In the old
sense there is no other sign save the sign of Jonah.' ([Luke XI,
29.](javascript:void(0);)) And He expressed Himself even more clearly
according to the meaning of words in the Gospel of St. Matthew. 'As a
heritage from olden times there remains the possibility that without
effort of his own, without Initiation, a man can develop a dim, shadowy
kind of clairvoyance and through revelation from above be led into the
spiritual world.' The indication here is that there were also Initiates
of a second kind --- men who went about among their fellows and who, as
a result of their particular lineage, were able to receive revelations
from above in a kind of sublimated trance condition, without having
undergone any special Initiation. Christ indicated that this twofold
manner of being transported into the spiritual world had come down from
ancient times. He bade the people to remember King Solomon --- thereby
pointing to an Individuality to whom, without effort on his own part,
the spiritual world was revealed from above. The 'Queen of Sheba' who
came to King Solomon was also the bearer of wisdom from above; she was
the representative of those predestined to possess, by inheritance, the
dim, shadowy clairvoyance with which all men were endowed in the
Atlantean epoch. (See [Luke XI, 31.](javascript:void(0);))

Thus there were two kinds of Initiates: the one kind typified by King
Solomon and the symbolic visit paid to him by the Queen of Sheba, the
Queen from the South; the other kind typified by those who bore upon
them the 'sign of Jonah', meaning the old Initiation in which the
candidate, entirely cut off from the outer world, passed through the
spiritual world for a period lasting three-and-a-half days. Christ now
added: 'A greater than Solomon, a greater than Jonah is here' ---
indicating thereby that something new had come into the world. The
message was not to be conveyed to the etheric bodies of men from
outside, through revelations, as in the case of Solomon, nor was it to
be conveyed to etheric bodies from within through revelations imparted
by the duly prepared astral body to the etheric body, as in the case of
those symbolized by the sign of Jonah. 'Here is something which enables
a man who has made himself ready for it in his I, to unite his being
with what belongs to the kingdoms of Heaven.' The forces and powers from
those kingdoms unite with the virginal part in the human soul, the part
that belongs to the kingdoms of Heaven and that men can destroy if they
turn away from the Christ-principle, but can cultivate and nurture if
they receive into themselves what streams from the Christ-principle.

As indicated in the Gospel of St. Luke, Christ\'s teaching is imbued
with the new element which came to the Earth at that time, and we see
how all the old ways of proclaiming the kingdom of God were changed
through the Event of Palestine. Christ says to those from whom, because
of their preparation, He could expect some measure of understanding: 'Of
a truth there are some among you who are able to see the kingdom of God,
not only in the manner of Solomon, through revelation, or through the
Initiation symbolized by the sign of Jonah; if any among you had
attained nothing further than that they would never see the kingdom of
God in this incarnation before their death.' The meaning is that before
their death they would not have seen the kingdom of God unless they had
attained Initiation in some form; but then they would also have had to
pass through a condition similar to death. Christ wished to show that
because of the new element now present in the world there can also be
people who, even before they die are able to behold the kingdom of
Heaven. The disciples did not at first understand what this meant.
Christ wanted to convey to them *that they* were to be the ones who
would come to know the mysteries of the kingdoms of Heaven before
natural death or the death experienced in the old form of Initiation.
The wonderful passage in the Gospel of St. Luke where Christ is speaking
of a higher revelation, is as follows: \"But I tell you of a truth,
there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they
see the kingdom of God.\" ([Luke ](javascript:void(0);)[IX,
27.](javascript:void(0);)) The disciples did not understand that it was
they themselves who, being close to Him, were chosen to experience the
tremendous power of the Christ principle which would enable them to
penetrate directly into the spiritual world. The spiritual world was to
become visible to them without the sign of Solomon, and without the sign
of Jonah. Did this actually happen?

Immediately after these words in the Gospel comes the scene of the
Transfiguration, when three disciples --- Peter, James and John --- are
led up into the spiritual world. The figures of Moses and Elijah appear
before them in that world and, simultaneously, the Christ Jesus in
Glory. ([Luke IX, 28--36](javascript:void(0);).) The disciples gaze for
a brief moment into the spiritual world --- a testimony that insight
into that world is possible without the faculties designated by the sign
of Solomon and the sign of Jonah. But it is evident that they are still
novices, for they fall asleep immediately after being torn out of their
physical and etheric bodies by the stupendous power of what was
happening. Christ finds them asleep. This account was meant to indicate
the third way of entering the spiritual world, apart from the ways
denoted by the signs of Solomon and of Jonah. Anyone capable in those
days of interpreting the signs of the times would have known that the I
itself must develop, that it must now be directly inspired, that the
Divine Powers must work directly into the I.

It was also to be made evident that the people of that time, even the
very best among them, were not capable of taking the Christ-principle
into themselves. The event of the Transfiguration was to be a beginning
but it was also to be shown that the disciples were not able, at the
time, to receive the Christ-principle in the fullest sense. Hence their
powers fail them immediately afterwards, when they want to apply the
Christ-power to heal one who is possessed by an evil spirit but are
unable to do so. Christ indicates that they are still only at the
beginning, by saying: I shall have to stay a long time with you before
your forces are able also to stream into others. (See [Luke IX,
41.](javascript:void(0);)) Thereupon He heals the one whom the disciples
could not heal. But then He says, again hinting at the mystery behind
these happenings, that the time has come when "the Son of Man shall be
delivered into the hands of men". This means: the time has come when the
I, which is to be developed by men themselves in the course of their
Earth-mission, is gradually to stream into them, to be given over to
them. This I is to be recognized in its highest form in Christ. "Let
these sayings sink down into your ears; for the Son of Man shall be
delivered into the hands of men. But they understood not this saying; it
was hid from them, that they perceived it not." ([Luke IX,
44--45](javascript:void(0);).)

How many have understood this saying? Greater and greater numbers will,
however, eventually understand that the I, the 'Son of Man', was to be
given over to men at that time. And the explanation that was possible in
those days, was added by Christ Jesus. He spoke to the following effect:
As he stands before us, man is a product of the old forces that were
active before the Luciferic beings had laid hold of human nature; but
the Luciferic forces drew man down to a lower level. The results of all
these processes have passed into the faculties possessed by him to-day.
Everything that comes from the seed, as well as all human consciousness,
is permeated by the influence that dragged man to a lower sphere.

Man is a twofold being. Whatever consciousness he has developed hitherto
is permeated by the Luciferic forces. It is only the unconscious part of
man\'s being, the last remnant of his evolution through the Saturn, Sun
and Moon periods when no Luciferic forces were at work --- it is only
this that streams into him today as a virginal element of his nature;
but it cannot unite with him without the qualities and forces he is able
to develop in himself through the Christ-principle. As he stands before
us, man is primarily a product of heredity, a confluence of what derives
from the male and female seeds. From the beginning he develops as a
duality --- a duality already permeated by Luciferic forces. As long as
a person is not illumined by self-consciousness, as long as out of his
own I he cannot fully distinguish between good and evil, he reveals to
us his earlier, original nature through the veil of his later nature.
Only the part of man that is 'childlike' still retains a last remnant of
the nature that was his before he succumbed to the influence of the
Luciferic beings.

Hence there is a 'childlike' part and also a 'grown' part in man. It is
the latter part of his being that is permeated by the Luciferic forces,
but its influence asserts itself from the very earliest embryonic stage
onwards. The Luciferic forces also permeate the child, so that in
ordinary life what was already implanted in the human being before the
Luciferic influence, cannot make itself manifest. The Christ-power must
re-awaken this, must unite with the best forces of the child-nature in
man. The Christ-power may not link itself with the faculties that man
has corrupted, with what derives merely from the intellect; the link
must be with that which has remained from the child-nature of primeval
times. That is what must be reinvigorated and must thereafter fructify
the other part (of man\'s nature).

"But there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be the
greatest," that is, which of them was most fitted to receive the
Christ-principle into his own being. \"But Jesus, perceiving the thought
of their heart, took a child and set it by them and said unto them.
Whosoever shall receive this child in my name\" --- that is, whosoever
is united in Christ\'s name with what has remained from the times
*before* the onset of the Luciferic influence "receiveth me; and
whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent me" ([Luke IX,
46--48](javascript:void(0);)) --- that is, He who sent this (childlike)
part of the human being to the Earth. Emphasis is there laid upon the
great significance of what has remained 'childlike' in man and should be
fostered and nurtured in human nature.

We may say of a human being standing before us that he has the rudiments
of very good qualities. We may try our hardest to develop those
qualities of his so that he makes real progress, but the methods usually
adopted today take no account of what is present in the foundations of
man\'s being. It is essential to pay heed to what has remained
'childlike' in man, for it is by way of this childlike nature that
warmth can be imparted to the other faculties through the
Christ-principle. The childlike nature must be developed in order that
the other faculties may follow suit. Everyone has the childlike nature
within him and this, when wakened to life, will also be responsive to
union with the Christ-principle. But forces --- of however lofty a kind
--- that are dominated by the Luciferic influence will, if they alone
work in a person today, repudiate and scoff at what can live on Earth as
the Christ power --- as Christ Himself foretold.

The Gospel of Luke, brings home very clearly the purport and meaning of
the new proclamation. When a person who bore on his forehead the sign of
Jonah went about the world as an Initiate of the old order, he was
recognized --- but only by those who were knowers --- as one who had
come to testify of the spiritual worlds. Special preparation was needed
before the sign of Jonah could be understood. But a new kind of
preparation was now necessary in order to understand what was greater
than anything indicated by the signs of Solomon and of Jonah --- a new
preparation which was to pave the way for a new understanding, a new way
of maturing the soul. The contemporaries of Christ Jesus could at first
understand only the old way, and the way preached by John the Baptist
was the one known to most of them. That Christ was now bringing an
entirely new impulse, that he was seeking for souls among those who did
not in the least resemble those who would formerly have been considered
suitable, was utterly incomprehensible to them. They had assumed that He
would associate with those who practised the old kind of disciplinary
exercises and would impart His teaching to such as those. Hence they
could not understand why He sat among those whom they regarded as
'sinners'. But He said to them: If I were to impart in the old way the
entirely new impulse I have come to give to mankind, if a new form of
teaching were not to replace the old, it would be as if I were to sew a
piece of new cloth on an old garment or pour new wine into old
wine-skins. What is now to be given to humanity and is greater than
anything indicated by the sign of Solomon or the sign of Jonah, this
must be poured into new wine-skins, into new forms. And you must rouse
yourselves sufficiently to understand the new teaching in a new form!
(See [Luke V, 36--37.](javascript:void(0);))

Those who were to understand must now do so through the powerful
influence of the I --- not through what they had learnt but through what
had poured into them from the spiritual Christ-Being Himself. Hence the
chosen ones were not people who according to the old doctrines were
properly prepared but people who in spite of having passed through many
incarnations, proved to be simple human beings, able to understand
through the power of Faith what had streamed into them. A 'sign' was to
be placed before them as well, a sign now to be enacted before the eyes
of all humanity. The 'mystical death' that had been a ceremonial act in
the Mystery Temples for hundreds and thousands of years was now to be
presented on the great arena of world history. Everything that had taken
place in the secrecy of the Temples of Initiation was brought into the
open as a single event on Golgotha. A process hitherto witnessed only by
the Initiates during the three-and-a-half days of an old Initiation was
now enacted before mankind in concrete reality. Hence those to whom the
facts were known could only describe the Event of Golgotha as being what
in very truth it was: the old Initiation transformed into historical
fact and enacted in the arena of world history.

That is what took place on Golgotha! In former times the
three-and-a-half days spent in deathlike sleep had brought to the few
Initiates who witnessed it the conviction that the spiritual will is at
all times victorious over the bodily nature and that man\'s soul and
spirit belong to a spiritual world. This was now to be a reality enacted
before the eyes of the world. An Initiation transferred to the outer
plane of world history such was the Event of Golgotha. Hence this
Initiation was not consummated only for those who witnessed the actual
Event, but for all mankind. What issued from the death on the Cross
streamed into the whole of humanity. A stream of spiritual life flowed
into mankind from the drops of blood which fell from the wounds of
Christ Jesus on Golgotha. For what had been imparted by other teachers
as 'wisdom' was now to pass into humanity as inner strength, inner
power. That is the essential difference between the Event of Golgotha
and the teachings given by the other founders of religion.

Deeper understanding than exists today is necessary before there can be
any true conception of what came to pass on Golgotha. When Earth
evolution began, the human I was connected physically with the blood.
The blood is the outer expression of the human I. Men would have made
the I stronger and stronger, and if Christ had not appeared they would
have been entirely engrossed in the development of egoism. They were
protected from this by the Event of Golgotha. What was it that had to
flow? The blood that is the surplus substantiality of the I! The process
that began on the Mount of Olives when the drops of sweat fell from the
Redeemer like drops of blood, was carried further when the blood flowed
from the wounds of the Christ Jesus on Golgotha. The blood flowing from
the Cross was the sign of the surplus egoism in man\'s nature, which had
to be sacrificed. The spiritual significance of the sacrifice on
Golgotha requires deep and penetrating study. The result of what
happened there would not be apparent to a chemist --- that is to say to
one with the power of intellectual perception only. If the blood that
flowed on Golgotha had been chemically analysed it would have been found
to contain the same substances as the blood of other human beings; but
occult investigation would discover it to have been quite different
blood. Through the surplus blood in humanity men would have been
engulfed in egoism if infinite Love had not enabled this blood to flow.
As occult investigation finds, infinite Love is intermingled with the
blood that flowed on Golgotha. The writer of the Gospel of Luke adhered
to his purpose, which was to describe how, through Christ, there came
into the world the infinite Love that would gradually drive out egoism.
Each of the Evangelists describes what it was his particular function to
describe.

If these things could be explained in still greater depth we should find
that all contradictions alleged by materialistic research would be
invalidated, as they are in the case of the antecedents of Jesus of
Nazareth when the true facts of his early childhood are known. Each
Evangelist describes what concerned him most closely from his own
standpoint. Luke describes what his informants, who were 'seers' and
'servants of the Word' were able to perceive as the result of their
special preparation. The other Evangelists are concerned with different
aspects --- the writer of the Gospel of Luke perceives the out-streaming
Love which forgives the most terrible of all wrongs the physical world
can inflict. Words expressing this ideal of Love, words of forgiveness
even when the most terrible of wrongs has been committed, resound from
the Cross on Golgotha: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do!" ([Luke XXIII, 34](javascript:void(0);).) Out of His infinite
Love, He who on the Cross on Golgotha accomplishes the deed of untold
significance, implores forgiveness for those who have crucified Him.

And now we turn once again to the doctrine of the power of faith.
Emphasis was to be laid upon the fact that there is something in human
nature that can stream from it and liberate man from the material world,
no matter how firmly he may he bound to that world. Let us think of a
person embroiled in the material world through every imaginable crime,
so that the forum of that world itself inflicts the punishment; let us
conceive, however, that he has saved for himself something that the
power of faith can cause to germinate within him. Such a person will
differ from another who has no faith, just as the one malefactor
differed from the other. The one has no faith, and the judgment is
fulfilled. In the other, however, faith is like a faint light shining
into the spiritual world; hence he cannot lose the link with the
spiritual. Therefore to him it is said: 'Today' --- since you know that
you are connected with the spiritual world --- 'you shall be with me in
Paradise!' (See [Luke XXIII, 43](javascript:void(0);).)

Thus do the truths of Faith and Hope, as well as the truth of Love,
resound from the Cross in the account given in the Gospel of Luke. There
is still something else, belonging to the same realm of the soul\'s
life, upon which the writer of this Gospel wishes to lay emphasis.

When a person\'s whole being is pervaded with the Love that streamed
from the Cross on Golgotha he can turn his eyes to the future and say:
Evolution on the Earth must make it possible for the spirit living
within me gradually to transform the whole of physical existence. We
shall in time give back again to the Father-principle, which existed
before the onset of the Luciferic influence, the spirit we have
received; we shall let our whole being be permeated by the
Christ-principle and our hands will bring to expression what is living
in our souls as a faithful picture of that principle. Our hands were not
created by ourselves but by the Father principle, and the
Christ-principle will stream through them. As people pass through
incarnation after incarnation, the spiritual power flowing from the
Mystery of Golgotha will stream into what they achieve in their bodies
--- which are the creations of the Father-principle --- so that the
outer world will eventually be imbued with the Christ-principle. People
will be filled with the confidence that resounded from the Cross on
Golgotha and leads to the highest hope for the future, leads to the
ideal that can be expressed by saying: I let Faith germinate within me,
I let Love germinate within me and I know that when they grow strong
enough they will pervade all external life. I know too that they will
pervade everything within me that is the creation of the
Father-principle. Thus Hope for humanity\'s future will be added to
Faith and Love, and men will understand that in regard to the future
they must acquire firm confidence, saying: If only I have Faith, if only
I have Love I may entertain the Hope that what has come into me from the
Christ Jesus will gradually find its way into the outer world. And then
the words resounding from the Cross as a sublime ideal will be
understood: "Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit!" ([Luke XXIII,
46](javascript:void(0);).)

Words of Love, of Faith and of Hope ring out from the Cross according to
the Gospel which indicates how spiritual streams that had previously
been separate united in the soul of Jesus of Nazareth. What had formerly
been received in the form of wisdom, streamed into men as an actual
power of the soul, exemplified by the sublime ideal of Christ. It is
incumbent upon human beings to acquire deeper and deeper understanding
of what is communicated in a record such as the Gospel of Luke, in order
that the three words resounding from the Cross may become active forces
in the soul. When with the faculties that the truths of spiritual
science can develop in them men come to feel that what streams down to
them from the Cross is not lifeless exhortation but vital, active force,
they will begin to realize that a truly living message is contained in
the Gospel of Luke. It is the mission of spiritual science gradually to
unveil what is enshrined in such records.

In this course of lectures we have tried to penetrate as deeply as
possible into the content of St. Luke\'s Gospel. In the case of this
Gospel too, one course of lectures cannot possibly unveil everything and
you will realise at once that a very great deal has inevitably remained
unexplained. But if you pursue the path indicated by lectures such as
have been given here you will be able to penetrate more and more deeply
into these truths and your souls will be better and better fitted to
receive and assimilate the living Word hidden beneath the outer words.

[]{#anchor}Spiritual science is not a body of new teaching. It is an
instrument for comprehending what has been given to humanity. Thus for
us it is an instrument for understanding the Christian revelation. If
you have this conception of spiritual science you will no longer say:
'It is Christian theosophy or just another form of theosophy!' There is
only one spiritual science and we apply it as an instrument for
proclaiming the truth, for bringing to light the treasures of the
spiritual life of mankind. It is the same spiritual science that we
apply in order to explain the Bhagavad Gita on one occasion and on
another the Gospel of Luke. The greatness of spiritual science lies in
the fact that it is able to penetrate into every treasure given to
humanity in the realm of spiritual life; but we should have a false
conception of it if we were to close our ears to any of the
proclamations made to humanity.

It is with this attitude of mind that you should listen to the
proclamation made in the Gospel of Luke, realizing that it is pervaded
through and through by the inspiration of Love. And then the increasing
knowledge that can be acquired from this Gospel with the help of
spiritual science will contribute not only to insight into the mysteries
of the surrounding Universe and of the spiritual ground of existence but
to an understanding of the momentous words in the Gospel of Luke: 'And
peace be in the souls of men in whom there is good will.' When
thoroughly understood, the Gospel of Luke is able, more than any other
religious text, to pour into the human soul that warmth-giving Love
through which peace reigns on Earth --- and that is the most beautiful
mirror-image of divine mysteries revealed on Earth. What can be revealed
must be mirrored on Earth and, as mirror-image, rise up again to the
spiritual heights. If we learn to understand spiritual science in this
sense it will be able to reveal to us the mysteries of the
divine-spiritual Beings and of spiritual existence, and the mirror-image
of these revelations will live in our souls. Love and Peace --- here is
the most beautiful mirror-image on Earth of what streams down from the
heights.

In this way we can receive and assimilate the words of the Gospel of St.
Luke which resounded when the forces of the Nirmanakaya of Buddha
streamed down upon the Nathan Jesus-child. The revelations pour down
from the spiritual worlds upon the Earth and are reflected from human
hearts as Love and Peace to the extent to which people unfold the power,
the 'good will', which the Christ-principle enables to flow from the
centre of man\'s being, from his I. The proclamation rings out clearly
and with the glow of warmth when we truly understand the meaning of
these words in the Gospel of Luke:

The revelation of the spiritual worlds from the heights and its
answering reflection from the hearts of men brings peace to all whose
purpose upon the evolving Earth is to unfold good will.

Thanks to \<a href="https://rsarchive,org"\>The Rudolf Steiner Archive.
