# Intergalactic Reincarnation

![](bernadette-2.jpg){class="a"}

## by Roberto Fox

as told to Frank Thomas Smith

There has been of old a deep alliance between the psychopathic and the
diabolic. Belief in the divine is nothing other than the substantially
convinced recognition of the fact that the world is meaningful, that is
to say, a spiritual world. Madness is the completest denial of this
meaningfulness. More than that, it is the symbol of the meaninglessness
of creation embodied in a creature. Where the last vestige of the
world\'s meaning is obliterated in a soul -- a very rare occurrence --
madness assumes mastery. Thence it comes that ages which deny the divine
meaningfulness of the universe are smitten even to blood by collective
madness, however reasonable and enlightened they may be in their own
conceit.

Franz Werfel -- from *The Song of Bernadette*

She was a lady from a distant land,

Beyond Aconcagua\'s peak.

Her time was short, she took my hand

In hers - she had no need to speak.

She was a lady from a distant land\
Whose love was true, embraces weak,

Her lonely land was distant though,

beyond Aconcagua\'s peak,

I came too late, so I\'ll never more know

Her glances, the smiles I used to seek,

The embraces, even though weak, of

The lady known as Bernadette.

Bernadette meant very much to me. Please, however, do not imagine some
kind of passionate, tragic love affair. In fact, we only ever spent a
total of three days together spaced over several years, in two different
continents, and during only one unbroken twenty-four hour period. So the
love that existed between us, although also physical, was mostly
spiritual.

She a teacher of handicapped children in a distant Latin land. I watched
her with the children and she watched me watching. I do hate to use a
corny expression like "love at first sight", so I won\'t. However, what
I felt was more like *recognition* at first sight, that this was someone
I already knew, although I had never seen her before.

A year passed before we met again, with me popping in and out from the
airport to a hotel, to business and finally to her school and her home,
for she was recovering from an operation for lung cancer.

She died when I was thousands of miles away, literally on the other side
of the world. I was not surprised for, although she seemed to be
improving when she journeyed to Switzerland and we spend that day
together with a view of Lake Geneva, I knew that lung cancer almost
always turns out badly. Not long afterward, months before we planned to
meet again in the south of that distant land, I received a telegram from
her friend, Mónica: "Bernadette passed away on Easter Sunday. *Pésame*,
Mónica."

A lack of surprise is one thing, another is a feeling that our
relationship was *not* over. And yet I knew that it was over\... here,
not only in Switzerland and that distant land, but on the planet Earth.
Please don\'t think that I was expecting to meet her again in heaven
where we would be bored stiff from floating on a cloud from here to
eternity. I believe in immortality, as does she. (Of course: she\'s
experiencing it.) But not that kind. You see, I have studied the work of
Rudolf Steiner, as did Berndette. In fact, the school where she taught
was based on Steiner\'s pedagogical teaching. A fundamental aspect of
his thought, which he called Anthroposophy, is reincarnation and karma.
Now these things are almost always associated with eastern religions and
theology. But along came Steiner and applied them to western philosophy,
which he expounded in many books and literally thousands of lectures
which were preserved in shorthand, then transliterated to clear script,
typed, printed and published.

The idea of reincarnation had long fascinated me, even before I
encountered Rudolf Steiner, who explained it in clear, logical language.
After all, what is the meaning of life if it\'s over almost as soon as
it begins, many a decade if you\'re lucky, much less if not. To have
meaning is to be intelligent. Take nature, which is intelligent and
beautiful, although often cruel. I know, Darwin\'s theory of evolution
sees this and much more as random, as "natural selection" -- a
contradiction in terms if I ever saw one: How can a random occurrence
*select*, when selection requires at least a modicum of consideration,
which requires intelligence and even thinking? Therefore, if nature is
beautiful and true and good, then a thinking-being or beings must have
made it so. The only thinking beings we know of, however, are *human*
beings, but these beings did not create nature. Therefore, another
thinking being or beings must exist, so intelligent and capable that
they could create nature. Now let\'s take a step beyond nature, for such
beings would hardly be satisfied with only nature and all its living
components, including plants, insects, animals and, yes, even man.

The meaning

The important thing is the conclusion that there must *be *a reason,
because it´s unimaginable that such an intelligent being (or beings)
would go to all that trouble for no reason. Unless they are playing a
game. But even games have reasons for being played, like winning or just
learning to play well. So let\'s admit that we don\'t know the reason,
but insist that there must be one, or more.

When experiencing the death of a child, a gringo friend once cried:
"It\'s not fucking fair!" Although perhaps expressed differently, it\'s
hard not to agree with him. There are so many things in life that are
"not fucking fair", like Bernadette´s death at 29, that one could easily
despair. The Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard reasoned that things
are so unfair that a real philosopher could only commit suicide, for
without a reason there is no hope. And the only way to have hope is to
have faith in God and/or in Jesus Christ. Well, it worked for him,
according to him.

But with all that science has learned since then about how things work
(not why) and the decline and corruption of the churches, it has become
increasingly difficult to have the kind of faith Kierkegaard advocated.
That\'s where reincarnation comes in. It furnishes hope by teaching that
we are all on a path of development and that wrongs will be righted and
right will be rewarded on the path of this development, during which
freedom will be obtained through love, or vice versa. In other words,
reincarnation redeems meaningfulness.

According to the stretchable laws of reincarnation, we have all lived
many times previously as steps on the path of development; some have
done well at it, others not. And we are destined to live many future
lives until it is no longer necessary: Nirvana

An important question arises, however: how to explain the population
explosion. Or rather: how to accommodate explosive population increase
with reincarnation. Where did all the seven billion inhabitants of the
earth come from if there was only a small fraction of today\'s
population a thousand years ago, or even a few hundred years ago, or --
to be extreme -- not so long after Adam and Eve? An explanation I\'ve
heard is that conditions have changed so rapidly that it\'s necessary
for souls to incarnate more rapidly as well, or that there might be new
souls. But that doesn\'t even approach the number of human beings which
account for the population explosion.

The Singularity

According to the present official scientific theory, around 13.7 billion
years ago everything we know of in the cosmos was an infinitesimal
singularity -- sort of a really tiny black hole over-stuffed with stuff.
Then some unknown trigger caused it to expand and inflate in
three-dimensional space. As the immense energy of this initial expansion
cooled, light began to shine through. Eventually, the small particles
began to form into the larger pieces of matter we know today, such as
galaxies, stars and planets.

*But:* Is ours the only universe that resulted from this "big bang"?
With current technology we are limited to observations within this
universe because the universe is curved and we are inside the fishbowl,
unable to see the outside of it (if there is an outside). Nevertheless,
there actually is quite a bit of evidence for a multiverse. And some of
the biggest names in science have taken the idea seriously. Stephen
Hawking was probably the most famous scientist who dabbled in the
parallel universe question. Indeed, his last work described a theory
which reduced the *quantity *of possible universes from infinite to
reasonable, so to speak.

Either way, a smooth running reincarnation system (cum karma) doesn\'t
seem probable as the cosmos is presently understood. That\'s what I was
thinking when I asked Robert Fuchs who, when I asked him what *he*
thought, said, "Isn\'t it reasonable to consider the possibility of
parallel universes, which give us more room to roam?" Then, after I
enthusiastically agreed, and after pulling on his earlobe so hard that
his hearing aid fell out, he said, "What if they, all those souls, came
from a parallel universe?"

That was a long time ago in a vegetarian restaurant on Maipú Street in
Buenos Aires. My office was close and I had recently decided to give up
eating so much meat, so I had lunch there almost every day. Robert was
also there often and we began to nod to each other, then sat at the same
table and conversed, first with small talk, then more interesting
things. He was twice my age, but looked twice as healthy and fit. I
asked him if he was a vegetarian and he nodded. "You?" He asked. He used
the informal "*tú"*  which was all right because he was so much older.
After a few minutes, though, he told me I should *tutear *him as well.
At that very moment I decided that from then on I was indeed a
vegetarian, so I said yes, which turned out to be true.

A few years previously I had encountered Anthroposphy because of the
Waldorf primary school my daughter attended in a Buenos Aires suburb. I
had also become a member of the Anthroposophical Society, but soon
realized that although Steiner\'s work was indeed illuminating, the
Society supposedly responsible for it in Argentina was a different
story, plagued by the usual egotism, ambition and dogmatism. I thought,
well, this is Argentina, what can one expect?

Robert and I discussed this one afternoon after lunch. We decided to
walk a bit together and go deeper into the subjects that interested us
both most. About my disappointment with the Anthroposophical Society,
Robert said, "After the death of the founder of a spiritual movement or
organization, it may continue, but will certainly degenerate, slowly or
quickly, but inevitably." I thought that was an exaggeration, but years
later found it to be true. When we arrived at the Plaza de Mayo, site of
the *Casa Rosada,* Argentina\'s pink white house, I suggested that we
sit on one of the benches, but Robert preferred to continue walking,
claiming that one thought better that way.

I can\'t continue quoting him because it was long ago, but I understood
quite well his meaning. He said that earth-like planets existed, if not
in our own galaxy, then in others, where human beings incarnate after or
before their earth incarnations. So, he claimed, my Bernadette was
probably alive, or eventually would be, in one of those other earthly
planets, and that I would likely follow when my time came. After all, he
explained, we have mutual karma to live through.

We made a complete round of the plaza in silence before I stopped and
faced Robert. It\'s an interesting theory, I told him, but no more than
that. He agreed that for me it could be no more than a theory, but that
he happened to know that it was much more than a theory.

"But how do you know?" I asked.

"I have seen it," he answered. As my bewilderment was so evident, he
went on: "I was a physicist at the Max Plank Institute in Germany. When
I began to talk about multiple universes and reincarnation, I got
strange looks from my colleagues and in answer to the obvious question
of how I knew, I explained that I had seen it, the director suggested
that I see a psychiatrist. Actually, it was more than a suggestion for
he made clear that if I wanted to keep my job I would take a month off,
with pay, and put myself under the care of a well known -- to him --
shrink. It was really quite generous of him, but not what I had in
mind." He continued walking and I skipped to catch up. "You see, in the
field of quantum mechanics its permissible to mention parallel
universes, as long as it\'s with a smile, visible or not. But when you
add reincarnation to the jumble and even karma, and are serious about
it, they think you mad. That\'s because they can only try to observe the
subatomic universe without considering the meaning of the real universe,
to the extent that meaningfulness itself is denied, because it implies
the divine, the non-random. Well, to me that \'s a form of madness and I
told them so."

He seemed to have finished, so I asked why he had come to Argentina. He
smiled and said his future wife was a research assistant from Argentina.
They fell in love and when he left the Institute she left with him. He
had written a book, in English, *From* *Genesis to the Big Bang,* sort
of popular science, under an invented name, Georg Schubert, in order not
to embarrass the Institute, and himself. It sold well. She offered to
translate it into Spanish, assuring him that it would also sell well in
the Spanish speaking world, which is numerically second only to the
English speaking one. He was surprised when it turned out that she was
right. They moved to Argentina, where he continued writing popular
science books with a smattering of science fiction under the *nom de
plume* Jorge Schubert, and she continued editing and translating them.
He opined that the translations were better than the originals.

I asked if he had written about reincarnation in alternate universes. He
said he hadn\'t yet, that he preferred to use the spoken word. There
were small groups of interested people in Buenos Aires and Mendoza,
where he lived most of the time with his wife, whose name happened to
also be Bernadette.

"Look Roberto," he said. "I know what you\'re thinking. I say I know
because I saw. But why should you believe that if you haven\'t also
seen? Well, my dear friend, it\'s a question of belief, not blind
belief, *fé *in Spanish, but of being open to the possibility, first of
parallel worlds and then belief *in the possibility *of human
reincarnation in them. Eventually, then, you will also *see."*

He stopped walking, looked strangely at me, then embraced me and said he
must go, that he was leaving early in the morning for Mendoza and would
be away for some time. He turned and walked quickly away. I felt like
running after him, asking how to contact him, where the "groups" were
located. But I thought of all that afterwards, when it was too late.
Although I continued patronizing the vegetarian restaurant on Maipú
Street, he never came again.

I haven\'t *seen* yet, but I have at least learned to believe in the
possibility.
