# Covid-19, World Morality and the culture of safety at any cost

![](smith-covid.jpg){class="alarge"}

## by Jeremy Smith

I think, therefore I am

R. Descartes

I have an ID, therefore I am

F. T. Smith

Although I wasn't a Waldorf pupil, my primary school was child-centred
enough not to interfere with my unconscious assumption that "the whole
world is moral", to use Rudolf Steiner's words. For whatever reason, I
was able to grow up as a child in the 1950s believing that those who had
charge over our lives, such as parents, teachers, MPs and ministers,
policemen, doctors and other public servants were, on the whole, good
people working for the benefit and general welfare of others. Looking
back to a time when I was younger and less disillusioned, I think I had
a fairly positive view of the role of government and officialdom.

In the ninth lecture of *Study of Man*, Steiner says: "When human beings
leave the world of spirit and soul and clothe themselves in a body, what
do they actually want? They want to realise in the physical world the
previous things they experienced in the spirit. Human beings before the
change of teeth are, in a manner of speaking, still wholly focused on
the past. Human beings are still filled with the devotion which they
develop in the spiritual world. (...) This basic mood is actually a very
lovely one. It is one which proceeds from the assumption, the
unconscious assumption: the whole world is moral."

Although we all know that this is not how the world actually is, it is
vital for the future development of the child that in their early years
their unconscious assumption that the world is beautiful, good and true
should not be destroyed. I've been reflecting on all of this during the
Covid-19 crisis, when the actions of government ministers have been
causing me more and more disquiet. For one of my generation and
political views, it has been a dispiriting experience to find myself
tending to agree with Ronald Reagan that "the nine most terrifying words
in the English language are 'I'm from the government and I'm here to
help' ". 

I'm also disappointed to see the readiness with which most people have
gone along with every new restriction, imposition and removal of an
established civil liberty by the government. There are two sides to
this, of course. During this crisis, we have seen some of the very best
of human nature. I'm a care home manager and when I took our residents
to get their jabs at a medical centre in Crowborough, there was a long
but good-natured queue of people waiting patiently in line. There were
friendly and helpful volunteers shepherding the queue, and the doctors
and nurses inside the clinic were just lovely with our residents, who
were understandably nervous beforehand, by reassuring them and
administering the injection so that none of them felt a thing. All in
all, this was the British at their best and it occurred to me that there
must have been a simiIar national spirit in people during the Second
World War. 

On the other side, I don't think one has to be paranoid to start
wondering whether there is another agenda behind all of this. By now it
is clear that all the vaccinations, mask-wearing, social distancing and
staying at home are not that effective in protecting us from Covid-19
and therefore most of the restrictions will have to stay in place.
Scientists are saying that while vaccines are having a major impact by
cutting illness and deaths, they are not effective enough to allow a
return to normal social mixing without the risk of "a big epidemic".
Professor Chris Whitty, England's chief medical officer, said on
5th April: "I don't think there's any surprise that it \[Covid\] is
still with us now, nor is it going to magically disappear over the next
few months. This virus will be with us for the foreseeable future. We
will have significant problems with Covid for the foreseeable future,
and I don't think we should pretend otherwise." 

And on Tuesday 13th April, Boris Johnson told Sky News: "The (Covid)
numbers are down -- of infections and hospitalisations and deaths. But
it is very, very important for everybody to understand that the
reduction in these numbers -- in hospitalisations and in deaths and
infections -- **has not been achieved by the vaccination programme **(my
emphasis). People don't, I think, appreciate that it's the lockdown that
has been overwhelmingly important in delivering this improvement in the
pandemic and in the figures that we're seeing". 

So, why is Boris all of a sudden playing down the role of vaccination in
dealing with Covid?  If it's the case that, even though you have had
your jabs, it will not make much difference -- what are they for? You
still have to wear a mask in public and practice 'social distancing' and
for months to come, you may not be able to travel abroad, or even go
very far within the UK. We don't know whether the jabs will reduce
transmissibility of the virus or whether they will protect you against
new variants -- but we do know that it is likely you will now have to
have additional jabs at regular intervals.  Pfizer's chief has just said
that people will probably require a yearly Covid booster shot. Oxford
Biomedica, which is manufacturing the Astra Zeneca jab in this country,
is expecting to earn over £50 million pounds this year from the jab. 

Back in December 2020, I wrote a piece about [*Coercion and the Covid-19
Vaccines*](https://anthropopper.com/2020/12/01/coercion-and-the-covid-19-vaccines/),
in which I argued that we were about to see the beginnings of a campaign
that would threaten to make life so difficult for anyone who didn't
agree to be vaccinated that it amounted to making it compulsory. Events
since have not proved me wrong.

There was a time, before he became prime minister, when Boris Johnson
presented himself as a believer in civil liberties. This is what he
wrote in his [*Daily Telegraph column in
2004*](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/3613116/Ask-to-see-my-ID-card-and-Ill-eat-it.html),
when the then Labour government was thinking of introducing ID cards: 

"If I am ever asked, on the streets of London, or in any other venue,
public or private, to produce my ID card as evidence that I am who I say
I am, when I have done nothing wrong and when I am simply ambling along
and breathing God's fresh air like any other freeborn Englishman, then I
will take that card out of my wallet and physically eat it in the
presence of whatever emanation of the state has demanded that I produce
it (...) and add, in the words of Barry Goldwater, that extremism in the
defence of liberty is no vice, and that I really don't know what I
dislike most about these cards. There is the cost; (...) There is the
loss of liberty, and the creepy reality that the state will use these
cards -- doubtless with the best possible intentions -- to store all
manner of detail about us, our habits, what benefits we may claim, and
so on."

What a difference political power and a pandemic can make to basic
principles! But it's been obvious for a long time to anyone who has
observed Boris Johnson's career and general behaviour that he has no
basic principles, other than to do in all circumstances whatever will
lead to his personal advantage. 

Now in 2021 the government, of which he is prime minister, is proposing
not only vaccine passports (ID cards by another name) but also a "[*UK
Health Security
Agency*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UK_Health_Security_Agency)". The
idea behind it is that to control the circulation of viruses, the
government needs to control what people are allowed to do. Our rights to
freedom of assembly, of protest, to send our children to school, to go
abroad, to visit the pub etc are now seen by the government as
privileges which they can remove or restore as they see fit. One idea
apparently being seriously considered in Whitehall is that each of us
will have to send in our temperature every day using the NHS app.

I have some skin in this game, as the Americans say. The government is
planning to legislate [*to make it illegal to work in a care
home*](https://www.carehome.co.uk/news/article.cfm/id/1645583/government-looking-plans-mandatory-care-home-staff-covid-vaccine) if
you have not had the vaccination -- but I want to wait for further
analysis about possible side effects from these experimental vaccines
before deciding whether or not to have one. 

Critics will scoff at my use of the term 'experimental' and point to the
NHS statement: "The vaccines approved for use in the UK have met strict
standards of safety, quality and effectiveness set out by the
independent Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).
Any coronavirus vaccine that is approved must go through all the
clinical trials and safety checks all other licensed medicines go
through. The MHRA follows international standards of safety." 

According to the scientific technical writer, Mark Pickles: "There are
many things wrong with this NHS statement. It is misleading at best. The
medicines are not licensed. The medicines are not approved (certainly
not according to the FDA in America, who in granting 'emergency
authorisation' for three vaccines tell us 'There is no US Food and Drug
Administration approved vaccine to prevent Covid-19', and the clinical
trials are still in progress. We are now in the long-term trials, or
Phase 3 of four phases, following which the medicine is assessed and
either licensed or revoked." 

What's more, "every letter of authorisation from the FDA to [*Janssen
BioTech, *](https://www.fda.gov/media/146303/download)to [*Moderna
TX*](https://www.fda.gov/media/144636/download) and to [*Pfizer
Inc*](https://www.fda.gov/media/144412/download) for the Covid-19
vaccines describes each product as: 'an investigational vaccine not
licensed for any indication.' " 

The medical term 'investigational' as used by the health authorities is
defined in the Merriam Webster dictionary as follows: 

"**Investigational** \[medical\]: relating to or being a drug or
medical procedure that is not approved for general use but is under
investigation in clinical trials regarding its safety and efficacy." 

To my mind, 'investigational' means that these vaccines are still
experimental. This also means that everyone who has had one of these
vaccines has been unwittingly taking part in the biggest trial ever
known in the history of medicine -- and it's worth remembering that all
of the companies making these vaccines have been granted blanket
immunity by government from litigation arising from unforeseen side
effects.

This creeping authoritarianism is to my mind quite sinister. Professor
Neil Ferguson of Imperial College, London, whose inaccurate projections
about the pandemic (forecasts of 250,000 deaths in the UK and 1.2
million in the US) have been relied on by several governments to shape
their response, made some interesting comments during an interview with
Tom Whipple of The Times: 

"I think people's sense of what is possible in terms of control changed
quite dramatically between January and March (2020)," Professor Ferguson
says. When SAGE (the UK government's Scientific and Advisory Group)
observed the 'innovative intervention' out of China, of locking entire
communities down and not permitting them to leave their homes, they
initially presumed it would not be an available option in a liberal
Western democracy. 'It's a communist one-party state, we said. We
couldn't get away with it in Europe, we thought... and then Italy did
it. And we realised we could.' " 

It seems from Ferguson's comments that the UK government is taking
lessons in social control from the Chinese Communist Party and applying
them to a so-far docile population at home, with success beyond their
expectations. But is it just paranoia on my part to draw the conclusion
that Boris Johnson and his bunch of political pygmies are simply the
servants seeking to enforce a larger agenda emerging from those who
regard themselves as our global masters?

Here it is instructive to listen to Edward Snowden. Wikipedia tells us
that Snowden is the "former computer intelligence consultant who copied
and leaked [*highly classified
information*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classified_information_in_the_United_States) from
the [*National Security
Agency*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Security_Agency) (NSA)
in 2013 when he was a [*Central Intelligence
Agency*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Intelligence_Agency) (CIA)
employee and subcontractor. [*His
disclosures*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_surveillance_disclosures_(2013–present)) revealed
numerous [*global
surveillance*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_surveillance) programs,
many run by the NSA and the [*Five Eyes Intelligence
Alliance*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_Eyes) with the cooperation
of [*telecommunication
companies*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telephone_company) and
European governments, and prompted a [*cultural
discussion*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactions_to_global_surveillance_disclosures) about [*national
security*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_security) and
individual privacy."

I have a great deal of respect for Snowden, his bravery and his sense of
outrage at the immorality of many covert government operations. I think
that Rudolf Steiner would also have applauded Snowden for revealing to
us the brutal reality and lies behind so much government rhetoric. I
urge you to listen to him[* in this short YouTube
video*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-pcQFTzck_c), where he is
speaking about coronavirus and the effect on our freedoms, and in which
he suggests that the pandemic is being used to put in place controls on
populations throughout the world -- and that governments will find these
controls very useful and want to make them permanent.

In the end, it comes down to a question of trust. We all know about
Boris Johnson's track record with truth, so I suspect that most of us
will not be reassured when we hear him declare his confidence in the
AstraZeneca or any other vaccine. These are fearfully complex questions
that only an epidemiologist or virologist can pronounce on with any
authority, so some of us will want to turn instead to scientists for
reassurance. But can we trust the scientists and doctors, many of whom
derive their funding from the giant pharmaceutical corporations? I don't
think so, which is why I want to see two or three years more data from
the ongoing clinical trials before I decide whether to have the jab. In
the meantime, I and my care home colleagues are having three tests a
week to show that we are free from infection. It is fundamentally
immoral for any government to seek to coerce me through the threat of
unemployment, loss of the right to travel etc, into a premature decision
on the matter of vaccination.

I am saddened to have lost my childhood assumption that the world is
beautiful, good and true because, in my heart of hearts, I think that
this is how the world is one day meant to be. At this time, however, as
we become more and more aware of the impending incarnation of the being
whom Christ called "the Ruler of this World", it is clearly unrealistic
to suppose that governments, leaders and the rest of us are not going to
be unconsciously or otherwise influenced in myriad negative ways by what
is coming towards us. Our only option is to become as aware, as far as
possible, of the reality behind world phenomena; and in Rudolf Steiner's
words, "it is humanity's task in this period to come to grips with evil
as an impulse in the evolution of the world". 


**Jeremy Smith** has worked in various branches of education since 1986,
in both employed and self-employed roles. Before that,he was the arts
and entertainments officer for one of the London boroughs and before
that trained as an actor at the Mountview Theatre School. He\'s had an
interest in the work of Rudolf Steiner for many years and has spent
several years as the education facilitator in a Steiner school.
Biodynamic agriculture, another of Steiner's initiatives, is a huge
interest of his and he\'s a shareholder of the Tablehurst & Plaw Hatch
Farms Co-op in Forest Row, East Sussex. He is also an executive director
of Tablehurst Farm and have a part-time role as registered manager for
the farm\'s care home.
