# The Greater the Disaster, the Greater the Profits

![](wall-1.jpg){class="a"}

## The Border-Industrial Complex in the Post-Trump Era

BY [**TODD MILLER**](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/toddmiller/)

In late February, I drove to see the Trump wall in Sasabe, Arizona. As
soon as I parked, a green-striped Border Patrol vehicle stationed a
quarter of a mile away began to creep down the dirt road toward us. Just
ahead, a dystopian "No Trespassing" sign was flapping in the wind. It
was cold as I stepped out of the car with my five-year-old son, William.
The wall ahead of us, 30-feet high with steel bollards, was indeed
imposing as it quavered slightly in the wind. Through its bars we could
see Mexico, a broken panorama of hills filled with mesquites backed by a
blue sky.

The Homeland Security vehicle soon pulled up next to us. An agent rolled
down his window and asked me, "What are you doing? Joyriding?"

[]{#anchor}After I laughed in response to a word I hadn't heard in
years, the agent informed us that we were in a dangerous construction
zone, even if this part of the wall had been built four months earlier.
I glanced around. There were no bulldozers, excavators, or construction
equipment of any sort. I wondered whether the lack of machinery
reflected the campaign promise of the recently inaugurated Joe Biden
that "[**not another
foot**](https://www.caller.com/story/news/local/texas/state-bureau/2021/01/19/not-another-foot-says-group-using-bidens-own-words-stop-wall/4210221001/)"
of Trump's wall would be built.

Indeed, that was why I was here --- to see what the border looked like
as the post-Trump era began. President Biden had started his term with
strong promises to reverse the border policies of his predecessor:
families torn apart would be reunited and asylum seekers previously
forced to stay in Mexico allowed to enter the United States.  Given the
Trump years, the proposals of the new administration sounded almost
revolutionary.

And yet something else bothered me as we drove away: everything looked
the same as it had for years. I've been coming to this stretch of border
since 2001.  I've witnessed its incremental disfigurement during the
most dramatic border fortification period in this country's history. In
the early 2000s came an influx of Border Patrol agents, followed in 2007
by the construction of a 15-foot wall (that Senator Joe
Biden [**voted**](https://www.senate.gov/legislative/LIS/roll_call_lists/roll_call_vote_cfm.cfm?congress=109&session=2&vote=00262) for),
followed by high-tech surveillance towers, courtesy of a
multi-billion-dollar [**contract**](http://www.homelandsecuritynewswire.com/boeing-wins-2-billion-sbinet-contract) with
the Boeing Corporation.

Believe me, the forces that shaped our southern border over the decades
have been far more powerful than Donald Trump or any individual
politician. During the 2020 election, it was commonly asserted that, by
getting rid of Trump, the United States would create a more humane
border and immigration system. And there was a certain truth to that,
but a distinctly limited one. Underneath the theater of partisan
politics, there remains a churning border-industrial complex, a
conjunction of entrenched interests and relationships between the U.S.
government --- particularly the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
--- and private corporations that has received very little attention.

The small border town of Sasabe and its surrounding region is a
microcosm of this.

The cumulative force of that complex will now carry on in Trump's wake.
Indeed, during the 2020 election the border industry, created through
decades of bipartisan fortification, actually donated more money to the
Biden campaign and the Democrats than to Trump and the Republicans. 

**The Complex**

In the 12 years from 2008 to 2020, Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) dolled out 105,000
contracts, or a breathtaking average of 24 contracts a day,
worth [**\$55
billion**](https://www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/bidens-border-briefing-tni-feb14.pdf) to
private contractors. That sum exceeded their [**\$52
billion**](https://www.justice.gov/archive/jmd/1975_2002/2002/html/page104-108.htm) collective
budgets for border and immigration enforcement for the 28 years from
1975 to 2003. While those contracts included ones for companies
like [**Fisher Sand and
Gravel**](https://tucson.com/news/local/contractor-building-1-3b-border-wall-in-southern-arizona-is-accused-of-shoddy-work-in/article_13f72412-f0aa-5313-985c-a8e2ee8b142f.html) that
built the 30-foot wall my son and I saw in Sasabe, many of them ---
including the most expensive --- went to companies creating high-tech
border fortification, ranging from sophisticated camera systems to
advanced biometric and data-processing technologies.

This might explain the border industry's interest in candidate Biden,
who [**promised**](https://www.npr.org/2020/08/05/899266045/biden-would-end-border-wall-construction-but-wont-tear-down-trump-s-additions):
"I'm going to make sure that we have border protection, but it's going
to be based on making sure that we use high-tech capacity to deal with
it."

Behind that bold, declarative sentence lay an all-too-familiar version
of technological border protection sold as something so much more
innocuous, harmless, and humane than what Trump was offering. As it
happens, despite our former president's urge to create a literal wall
across hundreds of miles of borderlands, high-technology has long been
and even in the Trump years remained a large part of the
border-industrial complex.

One pivotal moment for that complex came in 2005 when the deputy
secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, Michael Jackson
(previously Lockheed Martin's chief operating officer), addressed a
conference room of border-industry representatives about creating [**a
virtual or technological
wall**](https://items.ssrc.org/border-battles/immigration-reforms-and-border-security-technologies/).
"This is an unusual invitation," he said then. "I want to make sure you
have it clearly, that we're asking you to come back and tell us how to
do our business. We're asking you. We're inviting you to tell us how to
run our organization."

Of course, by then, the border and immigration enforcement system had
already been on a growth spurt. During President Bill Clinton's
administration (1993-2001), for example, its annual budgets had
nearly [**tripled**](https://www.justice.gov/archive/jmd/1975_2002/2002/html/page104-108.htm) from
\$1.5 billion to \$4.3 billion. Clinton, in fact, initiated the
immigration deterrence system still in place today in which Washington
deployed armed agents, barriers, and walls, as well as high-tech systems
to block the traditional urban places where immigrants had once crossed.
They were funneled instead into dangerous
and [**deadly**](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/jan/30/us-mexico-border-crossings-arizona-2020-deadliest-year) spots
like the remote and brutal Arizona desert around Sasabe. As
Clinton [**put
it**](https://www.c-span.org/video/?62882-1/president-bill-clintons-1995-state-union-address) in
his 1995 State of the Union address:

"\[O\]ur administration has moved aggressively to secure our borders
more by hiring a record number of new border guards, by deporting twice
as many criminal aliens as ever before, by cracking down on illegal
hiring, by barring welfare benefits to illegal aliens."

Sound familiar?

The Clinton years, however, already seemed like ancient times when
Jackson made that 2005 plea. He was speaking in the midst of a
burgeoning Homeland Security era. After all, DHS was
only [**created**](https://www.dhs.gov/creation-department-homeland-security) in
2002 in the wake of the 9/11 attacks. In fact, during George W. Bush's
years in office, border and immigration enforcement budgets grew from
\$4.2 billion in 2000 to \$15.2 billion
in [**2008**](https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/budget_bib-fy2008.pdf) ---
more, that is, than during any other presidency including Donald
Trump's. Under Bush, that border became another front in the war on
terror (even if no terrorists crossed it), opening the money faucets.
And that was what Jackson was underscoring --- the advent of a new
reality that would produce tens of thousands of contracts for private
companies.

In addition, as U.S. war efforts in Afghanistan and Iraq began to wane,
many security and defense companies pivoted toward the new border
market. As one vendor [**pointed
out**](https://tomdispatch.com/todd-miller-fortress-usa/) to me at a
Border Security Expo in Phoenix in 2012, "We are bringing the
battlefield to the border." That vendor, who had been a soldier in
Afghanistan a few years earlier, smiled confidently, the banners of
large weapons-makers like Raytheon hanging above him. At the time (as
now), an "unprecedented boom period"
was [**forecast**](https://www.prnewswire.co.uk/news-releases/border-security-market-outlook-2014-2024-259211881.html) for
the border market. As the company VisionGain explained then, a "virtuous
circle... would continue to drive spending in the long term based on
three interlocking developments: 'illegal immigration and terrorist
infiltration,' more money for border policing in 'developing countries,'
and the 'maturation' of new technologies."

Since 9/11, border-security corporate giants became big campaign
contributors not only to presidential candidates, but also to
key [**members**](https://www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/more-than-a-wall-report.pdf) of
the Appropriations Committees and the Homeland Security Committees (both
House and Senate) --- all crucial when it came to border policies,
contracts, and budgets. Between 2006 and 2018, top border contractors
like [**General
Dynamics**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/general-dynamics), [**Lockheed
Martin**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/lockheed-martin), [**Northrop
Grumman**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/northrop-grumman),
and [**Raytheon**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/raytheon-technologies) [**contributed**](https://www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/more-than-a-wall-report.pdf) a
total of \$27.6 million to members of the House Appropriations Committee
and \$6.5 million to members of the House Homeland Security Committee.
And from 2002 to 2019, there were nearly 20,000 reported [**lobbying
"visits"**](https://www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/more-than-a-wall-report.pdf) to
congressional offices related to homeland security. The 2,841 visits
reported for 2018 alone included ones from top CBP and ICE
contractors [**Accenture**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/accenture), [**CoreCivic**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/corecivic), [**GeoGroup**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/geo-group), [**L3Harris**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/l3harris-technologies),
and [**Leidos**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/leidos-holdings).

By the time Donald Trump entered the White House in 2017, the
border-industrial complex was truly humming. That year, he would oversee
a [**\$20-billion**](https://www.dhs.gov/publication/fy-2017-budget-brief) border
and immigration budget and have at his disposal nearly 20,000 Border
Patrol agents (up from 4,000 in 1994), 650 miles of already built walls
and barriers, billions of dollars in border technology then in place,
and more than 200 immigration-detention centers across the United
States.

He claimed he was going to build his very own "[**big, fat, beautiful
wall**](https://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-california-campaign-20160602-snap-story.html),"
most of which, as it turned out,
already [**existed**](https://tomdispatch.com/todd-miller-the-great-mexican-wall-deception/).
He claimed that he was going to clamp down on a border that was already
remarkably clamped down upon. And in his own fashion, he took it to new
levels.

That's what we saw in Sasabe, where a 15-foot wall had recently been
replaced with a 30-foot wall. As it happened, much of the [**450
miles**](https://www.cbp.gov/border-security/along-us-borders/border-wall-system) of
wall the Trump administration did, in the end, build really involved
interchanging already existing smaller barriers with monstrous ones that
left remarkable environmental and
cultural [**destruction**](https://www.motherjones.com/environment/2021/02/damage-wrought-by-trumps-border-wall-will-not-ever-be-remediated-or-mitigated/) in
their wake.

Trump administration policies forced people seeking asylum to wait in
Mexico, infants
to [**appear**](https://www.npr.org/2018/07/08/627082032/1-year-old-shows-up-in-immigration-court) in
immigration court, and separated family members into a sprawling
incarceration apparatus whose companies had been making up
to [**\$126**](https://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/issues/detention-101) per
person per day for years. He could have done little of this without the
constantly growing border-industrial complex that preceded him and, in
important ways, made him.

Nonetheless, in the 2020 election campaign, the border industry pivoted
toward Biden and the Democrats. That pivot ensured one thing: that its
influence would be strong, if not preeminent, on such issues when the
new administration took over.

**The Biden Years Begin at the Border**

In early January 2021, Biden's nominee to run DHS, Alejandro
Mayorkas [**disclosed**](https://www.politico.com/news/2021/01/08/alejandro-mayorkas-disclosures-456363) that,
over the previous three years, he had earned \$3.3 million from
corporate clients with the WilmerHale law firm. Two of those clients
were Northrop Grumman and Leidos, companies that Nick Buxton and I
identified as top border contractors in *Biden's Border: The Industry,
the Democrats and the 2020 Election*,
a [**report**](https://www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/bidens-border-briefing-tni-feb14.pdf) we
co-authored for the Transnational Institute.

When we started to look at the 2020 campaign contributions of 13 top
border contractors for CBP and ICE, we had no idea what to expect.  It
was, after all, a corporate group that included producers of
surveillance infrastructure for the high-tech "virtual wall" along the
border like L3Harris, General Dynamics, and the Israeli company [**Elbit
Systems**](https://tomdispatch.com/miller-and-schivone-bringing-the-battlefield-to-the-border/);
others
like [**Palantir**](https://notechforice.com/palantir/) and [**IBM**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/ibm) produced
border data-processing software; and there were also detention companies
like CoreCivic and GeoGroup.

To our surprise, these companies had given significantly more to the
Biden campaign (\$5,364,994) than to Trump (\$1,730,435). In general,
they had shifted to the Democrats who garnered 55% of their \$40 million
in campaign contributions, including donations to
key [**members**](https://www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/bidens-border-briefing-tni-feb14.pdf) of
the House and Senate Appropriations and Homeland Security committees.

It's still too early to assess just what will happen to this country's
vast border-and-immigration apparatus under the Biden administration,
which has made promises about reversing Trumpian border policies. Still,
it will be no less caught in the web of the border-industrial complex
than the preceding administration.

Perhaps a glimpse of the future border under Biden was offered when, on
January 19th, Homeland Security secretary nominee Mayorkas appeared for
his Senate confirmation hearings and was asked about the 8,000 people
from Honduras heading for the U.S. in a "caravan" at that very moment.
The day before, U.S.-trained troops and police in Guatemala
had [**thwarted**](https://www.thenation.com/article/world/migrants-immigration-guatemala-mexico/) and
then deported vast numbers of them as they tried to cross into that
country. Many in the
caravan [**reported**](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/1/19/i-was-so-scared-guatemalan-forces-disperse-migrant-caravan) that
they were heading north thanks to back-to-back catastrophic category 4
hurricanes that had devastated the Honduran and Nicaraguan coasts in
November 2020.

Mayorkas [**responded**](https://www.voanews.com/usa/immigration/bidens-homeland-security-nominee-vows-follow-us-immigration-law) rather
generically that if people were found to qualify "under the law to
remain in the United States, then we will apply the law accordingly, if
they do not qualify to remain in the United States, then they won't."
Given that there is no climate-refugee status available to anyone
crossing the border that meant most of those who finally made it (if
they ever did) wouldn't qualify to stay.

It's possible that, by the time I went to see that wall with my son in
late February, some people from that caravan had already made it to the
border, despite endless obstacles in their path. As we drove down
Highway 286, also known as the Sasabe Road, there were reports of
undocumented people from Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and Mexico
all traveling through the rugged Baboquivari mountain range to the west
of us and the grim canyons to the east of us in attempts to avoid the
Border Patrol and its surveillance equipment.

When President Dwight D. Eisenhower warned Americans against what he
dubbed "the military-industrial complex" in 1961, he spoke of its "total
influence --- economic, political, even spiritual... felt in every city,
every statehouse, every office of the Federal government." Sixty years
later, something similar could be said of the ever-expanding
border-industrial complex. It needs just such climate disasters and just
such caravans (or, as we're seeing right now, [**just such
"crises**](https://www.npr.org/2021/03/17/977827579/watch-live-dhs-secretary-testifies-as-border-swells-with-young-migrants)"
of unaccompanied minors) to continue its never-ending growth, whether
the president is touting a big, fat, beautiful wall or opting for
high-tech border technology.

For my son and me, the enforcement apparatus first became noticeable at
a checkpoint 25 miles north of the international boundary. Not only were
green-uniformed agents interrogating passengers in any vehicle heading
northwards, but a host of cameras focused on the vehicles passing by.

Whether they were license-plate readers or facial-recognition cameras I
had no way of knowing.  What I did know was that Northrop Grumman (which
contributed \$649,748 to Joe Biden and \$323,014 to Donald Trump in the
2020 election campaign) had received a valuable contract to ensure that
CBP's biometric system included
"[**modalities**](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2019/05/shareholders-northrop-grumman-demand-know-how-company-will-protect-human-rights)"
of all sorts --- face and voice data, iris recognition, scars and
tattoos, possibly even DNA sample collection, and information about
"relationship patterns" and "encounters" with the public. And who could
tell if the [**Predator B
drones**](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/documents/2019-Feb/air-marine-fact-sheet-uas-predator-b-2015.pdf) that
General Atomics produces --- oh, by the way, that company gave \$82,974
to Biden and \$51,665 to Trump in 2020 --- were above us (as they
regularly are in the border regions) using Northrup
Grumman's [**VADER**](https://revealnews.org/article/new-drone-radar-reveals-border-patrol-gotaways-in-high-numbers/) "man-hunting"
radar system first deployed in Afghanistan?

As we traveled through that gauntlet, Border Patrol vehicles were
everywhere, reinforcing the surveillance apparatus that extends [**100
miles**](https://tomdispatch.com/todd-miller-bill-of-rights-rollback-in-the-u-s-borderlands/) into
the U.S. interior. We soon passed a surveillance tower at the side of
the road first erected by the Boeing Corporation and renovated by Elbit
Systems (\$5,553 to Biden, \$5,649 to Trump), one of dozens in the area.
On the other side of that highway was a gravel clearing where
a [**G4S**](https://investigate.afsc.org/company/g4s) (\$49,233 to
Biden, \$33,019 to Trump) van usually idles.  It's a mobile prison the
Border Patrol uses to transport its prisoners to short-term detention
centers in Tucson. And keep in mind that there was so much we couldn't
see like the thousands of implanted motion sensors manufactured by a
host of other companies.

Traveling through this border area, it's hard not to feel like you're in
a profitable version of a classic panopticon, a prison system in which,
wherever you might be, you're being watched. Even five-year-old William
was startled by such a world and, genuinely puzzled, asked me, "Why do
the green men," as he calls the Border Patrol, "want to stop the
workers?"

By the time we got to that shard of Trump's "big, fat, beautiful" wall,
it seemed like just a modest part of a much larger system that left
partisan politics in the dust. At its heart was never The Donald but a
powerful cluster of companies with an active interest in working on that
border until the end of time. 

Just after the agent told us that we were in a construction zone and
needed to leave, I noticed a pile of bollards near the dirt road that
ran parallel to the wall. They were from the previous wall, the one
Biden had voted for in 2006. As William and I drove back to Tucson
through that gauntlet of inspection, I wondered what the
border-industrial world would look like when he was my age and living in
what could be an even more extreme world filled with ever more terrified
people fleeing disaster. 

And I kept thinking of that discarded pile of bollards, a reminder of
just how easy it would be to tear that wall and the world that goes with
it down.

Copyright 2021 Todd Miller

*Follow *TomDispatch *on *[***Twitter***](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[***Facebook***](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new dystopian
novel *[**Frostlands**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20) *(the
second in the Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[**Every Body Has a
Story**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[**A Nation Unmade by
War**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[**In the Shadows of the American Century:
The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[**The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since
World War
II**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

**Todd Miller**,
a [**TomDispatch**](https://tomdispatch.com/todd-miller-the-american-homeland-is-the-planet/)[** regular**](https://tomdispatch.com/todd-miller-the-american-homeland-is-the-planet/),
has written on border and immigration issues for the *New York
Times*, *Al Jazeera America*, and the NACLA Report on the Americas. His
latest book is [***Build Bridges, Not Walls: A Journey to a World
Without
Borders***](https://www.amazon.com/Build-Bridges-Walls-Lights-Media/dp/0872868346).
You can follow him on Twitter \@memomiller and view more of his work at
toddmillerwriter.com.

[](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/toddmiller/)

\
