# The White House Rodeo

![](four-horsemen.jpg){class="alarge"}

# By [Mike Davis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/mikedavis/)

Earlier this year, four gaunt horsemen in black shrouds cantered down
Pennsylvania Avenue. Since no one complained or even noticed, they
grazed their hungry steeds on the White House lawn. They've been there
ever since and threaten never to leave.

This interview with them is a Tomdispatch exclusive:

"First Horseman, please state your name for our readers."

"My name is Oil and my price is \$50 per barrel and higher yet to come."

"Fine, and you're from?"

"Hubbert's Peak."

"Is that in Colorado?"

No response.

"Are you in Washington for business or pleasure?"

"Both, actually. While wrecking the American economy, I'm also hoping to
bring immense happiness to a handful of giant energy corporations."

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0375706070/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

"Well, that's a popular cause in this town, so please enjoy your stay.
Now, Second Horseman, can I have your name for the record."

"My name is Proliferation, son of Wot and destroyer of worlds."

"Wot?"

"The War on Terrorism. Only the strong and nuclear-armed shall survive,
so sayeth Bush."

"I see, you're a traveling salesman. Visited any exotic locales lately?"

"Mainly Tehran and Pyongyang with some overnights in Karachi, Delhi, and
Brasilia. But I have a heavy travel schedule over the next year."

"Enjoy your frequent-flyer points. And now, number three, if I could
interrupt for a minute?"

"No problem. My name is Global Chaos. I was just sorting through some
vacation photos. Take a look."

"Thanks. Hmm, very National Geographic."

"Yes, I love the great outdoors. This is a melting glacier in Alaska.
Here's a flood in Bangladesh. Oh, one of my favorites, the epic drought
in the American Southwest."

"Eh, what are those white objects?"

"You mean the bones?"

"Bones? Maybe I'd better move on and meet Horseman Four."

"I am the pale rider and my name is Plague."

"I bet your first name is Bubonic?"

"No, that's my cousin. I'm the avian influenza pandemic."

"I'm sorry, but have I heard of you?"

"The World Health Organization says I am an unprecedented threat to
humanity. The world is utterly unprepared to deal with my arrival."

"Well, that's one helluva blurb."

"Yes, and my grandfather killed 100 million people in 1918-19."

"No kidding? Well, thanks for sharing. Now, I wonder if I can ask a few
questions of the entire group. First, does your posse, band, whatever,
have an agent or publicist?"

"Yes, Saint John."

"OK, and has he arranged your DC publicity? Have you had much
election-year media exposure? You know, O'Reilly, the Washington Post,
Meet the Press, the Lehrer News Hour.?"

"Oh, no," laughed Chaos, "no one has interviewed us."

"Come on, four big guys in black on horses, here in front of the White
House during an election season."

"No, honest," Proliferation chipped in, "they don't want to acknowledge
our presence."

"Well, how about the other side, the opposition party? Surely, they've
looked to you for a juicy angle. I mean the horse doo-doos all over the
White House lawn, not to mention.. Hey are you guys even citizens? Do
you have passports?"

"I can assure you," Proliferation insisted, "none of that matters. No
one wants to admit we're here."

"But why?"

Plague spoke. "Apocalypse denial. Your whole society is suffering from
acute apocalypse denial."

"That's preposterous, we're afraid of all kinds of things these days. We
tremble at the very thought of anthrax in the mail, plutonium on the
subways, or botulism in our Big Macs. We have regular orange alerts."

Plague interrupted. "No, that's the whole point. You're so terrified of
the shadows your rulers project on the wall that you can't see us
standing here, right outside your door."

"Hmm, so I guess you guys are the real deal?"

"Believe it."

"So what's your business plan?"

Chaos cleared his throat. "For generations, the wealthier 40 percent of
your population has lived inside an extraordinary bubble of privilege."

"In addition to enormous security of wealth and status," Proliferation
took over, "your affluent classes have been sheltered from the bitter
winds of history."

"We're the bitter winds," added Plague.

"And we'll burst your bubble," Oil promised.

A pale horse neighed.

"Unfortunately my recorder has run out of tape. I'm afraid we'll have to
end the interview with that."

"No problem," Oil smiled. "Y'all come back and visit. We're not going
anywhere."

Copyright 2022 Mike Davis

Featured image: Oil rig by Philippa McKinlay is licensed under CC
BY-NC-ND 2.0 / Flickr

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Mike Davis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/mikedavis/)

**Mike Davis** is the author of [*Planet of
Slums*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1844670228/ref=nosim/?tag=nationbooks08-20),
among many other books. His history of the car bomb, [*Buda\'s Wagon: A
Brief History of the Car Bomb*](https://tomdispatch.com/p/davis), which
grew out of a two-part [Tomdispatch](https://tomdispatch.com/) article
has just been published by Verso.

Thanks to \<a
href="[https://tomdispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)"\>
TomDispatch.com\</a\>, where this article originally appeared without
the title image.

## 
