![](Pictures/2000000700001A8800000DFE8F1FA966.svm){width="6.793cm"
height="3.582cm"}

Somewhere over the Rainbow

> \"As for my feelings toward \'Over the Rainbow,\' it\'s become part of
> my life. It is so symbolic of all my dreams and wishes that I\'m sure
> that\'s why people sometimes get tears in their eyes when they hear me
> sing it.\"

> Judy Garland

**Judy Garland** (born Frances Ethel Gumm; June 10, 1922 -- June 22,
1969) was an American actress and singer. While critically acclaimed for
many different roles throughout her career, she is widely known for
playing the part of [Dorothy
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dorothy_Gale)in [*The Wizard of
Oz*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wizard_of_Oz_(1939_film)) (1939) She
attained international stardom as an actress in both musical and
dramatic roles, as a recording artist and on the concert stage.

Garland began performing as a child with her two older sisters, in
a [vaudeville](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaudeville) group \"[The
Gumm
Sisters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judy_Garland#The_Gumm/Garland_Sisters)\"
and was later signed
to [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer) as
a teenager. She appeared in more than two dozen films for MGM. Garland
was a frequent on-screen partner of both [Mickey
Rooney](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mickey_Rooney) and [Gene
Kelly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gene_Kelly) and regularly
collaborated with director and second husband [Vincente
Minnelli](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vincente_Minnelli). Other
starring roles during this period included [*Meet Me in St.
Louis*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meet_Me_in_St._Louis) (1944), [*The
Harvey
Girls*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Harvey_Girls) (1946), [*Easter
Parade*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Easter_Parade_(film)) (1948)
and [*Summer Stock*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summer_Stock) (1950).
In 1950, after 15 years with MGM, the studio released her amid a series
of personal struggles that prevented her from fulfilling the terms of
her contract.

Although her film career became intermittent thereafter, two of
Garland\'s most critically acclaimed roles came later in her career: she
received a nomination for the [Academy Award for Best
Actress](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Academy_Award_for_Best_Actress) for
her performance in [*A Star Is
Born*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Star_Is_Born_(1954_film)) (1954)
and a nomination for [Best Supporting
Actress](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Academy_Award_for_Best_Supporting_Actress) for
her performance in [*Judgment at
Nuremberg*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judgment_at_Nuremberg) (1961).
She also made record-breaking concert appearances, released [eight
studio
albums](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judy_Garland_discography#Studio_albums) and
hosted her
own [Emmy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primetime_Emmy_Award)-nominated
television series, [*The Judy Garland
Show*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Judy_Garland_Show) (1963--1964).

She struggled in her personal life from an early age. The pressures of
early stardom affected her physical and mental health from the time she
was a teenager; her self-image was influenced by constant criticism from
film executives who believed that she was physically unattractive and
who manipulated her onscreen physical appearance. Throughout her
adulthood she was plagued by alcohol and substance abuse, as well as
financial instability. Her lifelong [substance use
disorder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substance_use_disorder) ultimately
led to her death from an accidental [barbiturate
overdose](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barbiturate_overdose) in 1969,
at age 47.

That\'s from Wikipedia. I saw Judy perform at the Palace theater in New
York when I was nineteen years old, just before leaving for U.S. Army
basic training. It was during the Korean War. I was already in love with
her, (although I went to the Palace with a girlfriend) probably because
of *The Wizard of Oz *(1938) and other films. She was sensational,
possessed of a charisma impossible to describe. The audience was
devastated, when she finished and ran off there was absolute
silence\...until the standing ovation began and never ended.

Here are links to her singing *Somewhere Over the Rainbow* in The wizard
of Oz and in 1951 at the Palace:

[]{#anchor}\<a
href=\"<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U016JWYUDdQ>\"\>In the Wizard of
Oz\</a\>

![](Pictures/2000000700000DDA0000114C63B82D1E.svm){width="3.545cm"
height="4.427cm"}

[]{#anchor-1}\<A
HREF=\"<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ss49euDqwHA>\"\>at the
Palace\</a\>

![](Pictures/20000007000014D000000B83737A864F.svm){width="5.329cm"
height="2.947cm"}
