# Meeting Anthroposophia Today

![](steiner-essential.webp){class="a"}

## Robert McDermott interviewed by Ashton Arnoldy

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** So you've just retired from being a professor
for the Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness program at the
California Institute of Integral Studies (CIIS), where you were also
once president. Would you like to share a bit more about yourself?

***Robert McDermott:*** Sure. I'm essentially a professor. I was a
professor for fifty-eight years. Two years in administration at City
University of New York, and nine years at CIIS. Throughout all the time
that I was a professor, I was also in administration---chairing boards
and serving as president for various organizations. So I have a strong
administration gene. Ah, but also a professorial gene. So for me the two
parts of my life are, in fact, very close, very complementary and hardly
divisible. So when people ask, «What will you do when you retire?» And
I'll say, «Oh, I'm going to do the same,» the same as I did while I was
a Professor and a President: I will try to get more knowledge, which I
will then try to share in writing and lecturing and teaching, and I will
continue to be active, for example, in this conversation, which is, you
know, a form of teaching, but really sharing---sharing what I'm
thinking, etcetera. There I am---I'm ready for your questions, at least
I'm ready as I will be.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** Prior to discovering Steiner, you had been
deeply involved with the work of the philosopher and spiritual teacher
Sri Aurobindo---publishing his work in English, and making a documentary
about his work. What was it about Steiner's work that pulled you?
Steiner took on more prominence in your life---is that right?

***Robert McDermott:*** That's exactly right, Anthroposophy became
more prominent, my primary spiritual commitment. And I think that any of
these biographical questions lead me to give two answers. One is
practical and that I understand. The other one is karmic and spiritual
and more complicated that I accept, and I can point to, but I don't
really understand it very well when it's happening and it's only in
retrospect that I can say «that makes sense.»

I think, though, that the aspect that brought me to having a primary
relationship with Steiner was his own practical work, the work that he
did in the last six or seven years \[of his life\]. In other words,
after the First World War and Europe was in a shambles and he saw the
need for a different economics and a different educational system and a
different farming system. By that time, he was lecturing to several
thousand people a night in various European cities. People were coming
to him and asking for advice of help or direction. And among those works
I was deeply interested in education -- I was a professor, after all. I
had children, and my wife was a teacher. And so when I learned about
Waldorf---that was very exciting, that this very high spiritual being
was giving lectures on what to teach in kindergarten and what to teach
in the third grade to sixth grade to ninth grade to 12th grade
I mean, several, literally several hundred lectures on the Waldorf
approach to teaching and to education and the development of the child
and what is helpful and what is useful and what is deleterious. So all
of that attracted me because I'm a practical person. I'm not really so
mystical. So yes, I liked that he had lectures on economics and social
structures and communities. After all, I was influential in many
communities and many of them -- most of them -- were not working very
well.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** You've taught Steiner alongside other figures
like Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, Sri Aurobindo, and Carl Jung, and
you've written a whole book, called **Steiner and Kindred Spirits**, to
bring him into conversation with other thinkers. Would you like to say
anything about that?

***Robert McDermott:*** Sure. I could say about 440 pages about it --
that's why I wrote **Steiner and Kindred Spirits **\[laughs\]. I was
once introduced before a lecture, and the person said, «well, all you
need to know about Robert McDermott is that he is a pluralist.» So, I
have many sources and I'm on many tracks, but I have a home base,
Steiner and Anthroposophy, and then the Indian world as a companion and
then I have lots of Christianity that is not Anthroposophical, like
Teilhard and little bit of Thomas Merton. So to try to answer the
question: it's to my mind tragic that these great figures did not know
about Steiner. Steiner either didn't know about them or didn't pay
attention to them. The one combination that should have been realized
was Steiner and Jung. They were an hour apart by train. Jung's architect
was an Anthroposophist. Jung's wife, Emma, went to the Goetheanum and
studied fairy tales with people at the Goetheanum.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** They knew about each other.

***Robert McDermott:*** They knew about each other. Jung said almost
exactly what Freud said about him after a while---Jung said: «Oh,
Steiner and those people; he just makes it up as he goes along.» This is
in a book by Gerhart Wehr. Wehr himself was an Anthroposophist and a
very fine scholar of Jung. So there are these people who know both. But
they \[Jung and Steiner\] did not connect. Now, I'm more critical of
Jung because by the time Steiner died in 1925, the Jung that we're all
excited about wasn't really well known. The Jung of the Red Book, those
three amazing years between 1913 to 1917 when Jung went deep into his
unconscious and did children's games in order to discover general
archetypal structures. So there was time enough for Steiner to know how
close they were. And Steiner did a lecture on Jung and Freud that wasn't
great. But had he known about the Jung starting in, say, 1935, then 45'
and 55', and right up until 1961, had he known about **Memories, Dreams,
Reflections**, or one of those major works like** The Symbols of
Transformation** or one of those other fabulous books, he would have had
a different attitude. Now, why didn't Jung look into anything that
Steiner was doing when sometimes they were focused on the same topic?
It's tragic.

And Teilhard didn't die until 1955. He did not know about Steiner, but
he spent so many years in China that he wasn't involved with the German
culture. He was involved with French and Chinese, whereas Jung spent his
whole life in Switzerland. Well, Steiner's headquarters was in
Switzerland. It's only a tiny state. So that's the one that really bugs
me, you know? And then there are other great figures. I don't know what
\[Jean\] Gebser learned from Steiner, but the resemblances are
remarkable. The person who knew, who I wanted to ask about this and
never did, was William Irwin Thompson, because he knew both Steiner and
Gebser very thoroughly. Somebody should write something about that---how
much did Gebser learn from Steiner?

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** Yeah, that would be a great research project
because he \[Gebser\] does cite the term ‹Anthroposophy›, but he only
cites the person who first used the term, who Steiner also references at
some point, but he doesn't---Gebser, in **The Ever-Present Origin**---he
doesn't actually mention Steiner at all. But you're right, I agree,
there are striking resemblances. Gary Lachman actually wrote a short
essay comparing them.

This brings me to my next theme: Steiner in the contemporary, bringing
Anthroposophy forward. The following quotation is from your **Steiner
and Kindred Spirits**:

«The hundred years since Steiner's lectures on the evolution of
consciousness have shown the limitations and the tendency toward
exceptionalism of a European (and American) worldview. While the level
of insight and method of rendering would seem to be valuable, and
perhaps unsurpassed in depth and detail, Steiner's account will have to
be extended to include indigenous, Jewish, Islamic, Asian, and feminist
modes of consciousness. Regrettably, and unacceptably, in Steiner's
account, people of color are almost invisible. The quality of his work
is profound and important but will not continue to be so unless it is
extended to the past, present, and future of the entire human community.
We should not consider an extension of Steiner's account of the
evolution of consciousness unfaithful to his mission, but rather it's
appropriate, even necessary, continuation.»

Would you care to elaborate on this theme? And maybe you can also talk a
little bit about what you've described as the ‹Spiritual Mission of
America›?

***Robert McDermott:*** Ah, yes, that quotation, which I'm conscious
of, because some people have written to me saying, «Here's what I just
read. I'm a little surprised that you wrote that, considering, you know,
most Anthroposophists don't hold that view.» Anyway, throughout my my
whole career, I've been interested in evolution of consciousness, and
I'm **also** interested in America. Among my favorite authors are
Emerson, William James, Josiah Royce, John Dewey, Whitehead. So I'm very
interested in this relevance of America, because I think America is an
extremely powerful country. It's too powerful, actually. It's powerful
and it's dangerous. It loves war. It's a very violent country. And it's
a little bit, I'm tempted to say, schizophrenic. The founding, though
racist and elitist, is nevertheless fabulous. It's just such an amazing
contradiction, these great ideals. In the meantime, these people were
slave owners, and only men could vote. Women brought about the vote by
horrible suffering, by being force-fed and tortured for months on end to
get the vote in 1920. The country was over 100 years old, 150 years old.
So it's a very imperfect country.

At the same time, it has lots of ideals and it's trying to do something,
conscious or not, which is certainly rare on the scale that is trying to
do it, which is to create a multicultural **culture**. It was
founded---no other cultures of countries were **founded**. They all have
lineages that go back hundreds and thousands of years. The other day at
the funeral of the Queen, they're talking about «this hall that was
built in 1586 and this one is 1632,» and whatever else. We have no such
markers. It's still a relatively new country, and yet it's the oldest
democracy. But as Benjamin Franklin said, «if you can keep it.» So, it's
an experiment. And I think it's terribly important to create a new
culture, a culture based on selected ideals. Some of the people who make
me most unhappy are these originalists who think that everything is in
the original Constitution---I don't even know that they really believe
this. I mean, it seems like it's really foolish to believe it, but there
are political advantages to believing that everything in the
Constitution is right and nothing needs to be changed, which is, of
course, hopeless, because the Civil War was fought for four years over
in order to show that the Constitution was not adequate. So I'm very
interested in all that and I think it's tremendously important. America,
for better or worse, and it is sometimes absolutely for the worse, is
very important.

So what would Steiner ideas say about that experiment? Well, I think
Steiner was enlightened with respect to the definition of the human as
being individual and universal and not defined by nationality or group
or race. Even though race is a discredited concept, race isn't really a
reality, it is a political concept with great consequences. So I think
Steiner is fundamentally right that we should understand and make
relationships to persons as individuals who have universal
characteristics. But Steiner himself lecturing, after all, 6000 times,
sometimes spoke with an evolution-of-consciousness-attitude which
definitely prized or privileged European and Christian ideals and
consciousness. And if you scream at him and say, «you can't do that
because it's somehow unfair or insufficiently respectful of China or
India» or whatever else I think Steiner would say, «This is not my
fault. This is objective. The ideals that are advancing evolution of
consciousness did come from Europe.» So I sometimes say, lecturing on or
teaching on something about evolution of consciousness, «It might be
true, even though it is disastrous in terms of our relationships.» You
know, it's like where you have to say, «I'm really sorry that this is
true.» Now, I'm not saying that everything that came out of Europe was
better than anything anywhere else. But I am agreeing with Steiner that
some great insight, some mode of consciousness that came from modern
Europe **is** influential throughout the world, for good reason. It is
the source of some really good ideas. That said, it's also true that the
very people, cultures, nations, and leaders who are advocating those
really good ideas---also included in those very ideas, not as some
far-away shadow, but closely attached to those very ideas are violence,
colonialism and racism. Those have got to be expunged from the idea of
evolution of consciousness, and we also need a reduction in the
privileging of national identity.

Steiner, I don't think he ever believed that he belonged to a particular
nation. He was born in Austria, taught and lived in Germany, and died in
Switzerland. So he was certainly a European. But that's not what he
thought was important. He really viewed the individual and universal as
highest and not the middle level, which is national group. In Chapter 14
in Philosophy of Freedom in 1893, which is was early in his career, he
has a chapter on the fallacy of gender, that gender should not be a
factor in people's identity or privilege or responsibility. I think
that's pretty good. And in 1893, he had the same view of all national
identity. He also spoke about what he considered to be the advance guard
of consciousness evolution that he identified within certain ideas and
thinkers in Europe, not nations, but **individuals** who he thought had
great karmic tasks to advance humanity. It's quite complicated.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** Yeah, I think he's consistently against that
kind of abstract nationalism and, instead, for what might be called a
kind of cosmopolitical localism, wherein, the ideals of social
threefolding, for example, would be realized through the particularity
of each place and its peoples, but I also think many people today are
inclined to think about history without any assumption of reincarnation,
but he \[Steiner\] is consistently coming from that place. And so if we
are inclined to only think about ourselves as living once, and not
really belonging to any kind of common humanity that is spiritual in
essence, that transcends just one particular life, then we may not be
inclined to think about the ideals that are arising out of one
particular continent, and certain cultures that have, you know, had such
a big impact on the earth, as belonging to more than just **those**
people, **those** people in **those** times, rather than to **all** of
humanity **across** the ages. I feel like this is an important aspect
\[of Steiner's thought\] that can be overlooked---that this evolution of
consciousness is something that is ongoing and will see contributions
coming from different places as it unfolds.

***Robert McDermott:*** That's very important to him. One of his big
complaints is the parochialism and exclusivity and arrogance of
institutional Christianity. But when he's talking about Christianity,
he's not talking about the Christianity that exists. He's talking about
a universal gospel of love that would be throughout the world, and that
there would be expressions of that revelation in the language and flavor
of all of all the different cultures. He had the same idea of
Anthroposophy. People tend to think that, well, if you're an
Anthroposophist, then you're a Christian. But he was very comfortable
with the idea of Buddhist Anthroposophists and Hindu and Daoist and
whatever else, because for him, Anthroposophy is not an exclusive idea
at all. Christianity and Anthroposophy are both intended to be universal
and not **owned**, is not supposed to **exclude** any other set of
ideals. But sometimes it doesn't sound that way.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** Well, you know that **central event** that
informs the way of thinking about Christianity in Anthroposophy, this
cosmic event that---because it's treated by Steiner as a historical
event for the whole evolutionary cosmos, for all beings---in order to
see Anthroposophy and Christianity as something universal, there has to
be a kind of openness to the possibility that this event \[the Mystery
of Golgotha\] actually happened, but this openness is hard to come by in
our materialistic times.

***Robert McDermott:*** It is, because we're all influenced, or even
determined by our local perspective. He himself was as well, because he
was a Central European. He never came to North America or to India or
China. So all of his language was sort of European-Christian inflected.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** And because of the hold of materialism over our
imaginations, our conditioning, that something like that could even be
possible I think is hard for a lot -- for probably most people -- to
fully accept.

This reminds me of another question that I wanted to ask you -- you
recently gave a lecture on John's Gospel in which you mentioned Steiner
having said once that those who can read in the akashic record are
capable of making mistakes. And you mentioned how this is not something
some Anthroposophists are willing to acknowledge -- that there is a
potential for mistakes to happen. You also mentioned how complex the
reading of the akashic record is. And so I'm curious: we're aware that
Steiner made statements that reflect a kind of ignorance -- racist
statements -- that are hard to reconcile with our understanding of
Steiner as this spiritual teacher. How does one reconcile the fact that
he said certain things that we today feel are completely untrue with
what we find compelling in his overall picture of human evolution? What
are your thoughts about all this?

***Robert McDermott:*** So the question is: was Steiner sometimes
wrong? Did he admit that he was sometimes wrong? And how do we square
that with people who think that, not only he wasn't wrong in any of his
statements, but he couldn't be because it was a direct transmission from
the Akashic record? I have several responses. One is that, as Steiner
himself says, it's quite a difficult process. Just think about
how---when Steiner is speaking---he is not reading a script as when we
are reading words on a screen. He is reading **light**. Light is not
writing words. It's hard to imagine what was going on. But he says that
some people, including himself, can read ideas in light. You can read
what lives in light and events in light, but there's a transition
between light and words. It's quite radical. There's a lot of
opportunity for misjudgment such that sometimes, he says, «At that time,
I hadn't seen such and such, and later I was clearer about it.» Now even
if he were clear, it doesn't mean that he articulates what he's clear
about in a way that we can understand clearly. Then there's the whole
problem of German being translated to all the other languages. So this
is a partially imprecise process. It's not taking stenography from what
somebody said. Then in addition to that, the very concepts that Steiner
had available to him were German language concepts. He knew English
reasonably well and French reasonably well. But he didn't have a
fluency. He certainly didn't have a fluency in any Asian language. And
so there's this whole question of «What concepts did he have at his
disposal to adequately explain these various developments?» For example,
I'm very conscious that these great figures who I consider Steiner's
kindred spirits, say Sri Aurobinod or Teilhard, did not have the concept
of the **etheric**. And they might say, «Oh, when you go into that
place, there was a certain energy there.» Well, that's sort of like
‹etheric,› but it's not quite the same. And so they didn't have that
concept of what the human body as a living body has in common with the
etheric around the globe. Here's a way of understanding the world that
is not available to them because they lacked the concept. Now, there
aren't **so** many concepts that they needed that they didn't have. But
I think **etheric** is one. For example, Jung had the concept
**psyche**, which is approximately the same as **astral**. So there's
not a loss there. But those who didn't have the concept **etheric** at
all can only talk around it, but not actually, as Rick Tarnas would say,
not ‹nailing it.›

So that's a positive part on Steiner's side. But he might not have had
language concepts that he needed for certain phenomena that weren't
accounted for in German language in the early 20^th^ century. Then,
finally, Steiner comes at a certain time. All of his work is between,
let's say the last decade of the 19^th^ and the first two and 1/2
decades of the 20th century. He didn't live through or after the Second
World War when some many aspects of human life and human consciousness
were violated and just proven to be wrong. I mean, there was a degree of
inhumanity, of just unfathomable barbarity in the Holocaust that is just
so dramatically different from whatever language we would need to talk
about history. And he didn't experience that. Similarly, he didn't
really take in the extreme multiculturalism in the United States. There
are school districts where the first language of the children in the
first grade is represented by 100 different languages. And that is the
case in maybe 100 school districts throughout the United States. Now,
Steiner had no awareness of that. He had no awareness that the Jewish
population in New York City is larger than the population of Israel. I
mean, Astoria, a very large section of New York City, is significantly
an Indian population. And there are other parts of New York City in the
South Bronx that are Latino -- 100,000 Spanish-speaking people in a
particular area. Or like Chinatown. Same thing is true in San Francisco,
but it's a much smaller scale. This is an incredible experience with all
these children now, who at home, they're speaking one language, and then
they go to school, they learn a new language, and their friends are all
coming from families that are speaking different languages. And then
they all have to become American citizens that contribute to American
culture. That is a new experiment in the world.

Now, Steiner didn't know about that in a way that was at all adequate.
So it's not a good idea to take what he says about a nation or a culture
and apply it to the United States. He says, quite interestingly I think,
that in order to know the truth of anything, you have to see all sides.
He said an idea or an event is like a tree. You can't get an adequate
picture of the tree except by going around the back. So you have to have
at least four different angles on an idea or an event or a development.
I think I could say about him what my colleague said about me: he **is**
a pluralist. But he's also deeply grounded in early 20th century German
language culture. So it's kind of a dialectic. He tries to get out of
it, and often he does, and sometimes he doesn't. But that's our job, to
improve upon what he did.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** And so, as someone who appreciates the work of
Steiner and finds it instructive, it sounds like, from what you're
describing, that it's important for us to understand where he's
strongest in his work and **also** be able to acknowledge where he may
be speaking out of limitation or insufficient understanding---to
acknowledge that this could even be possible for him.

***Robert McDermott:*** Well, I think that Steiner has the
disadvantage of his advantage. He is astonishing. The book that I
published with all these kindred spirits, for a couple of years when I
was first beginning to think about the book, I called it ‹Unique, Not
Alone.› Now, the unique part, I think, is not a very helpful word
because everybody is unique, but unique is appropriate in that he seems
to be singular in the level, the depth, the extent of his useful
revelations. I think I know all the competitors. I don't think there's
anybody who competes successfully on the depth or the extent or the
usefulness of education, gardening, medicine, economics, scripture,
interpretation, history, etc. It's overwhelming. That is a disadvantage
because, first off, it makes people annoyed. «This guy's got a nerve
thinking that he knows all this or that he thinks that I'm going to
accept that he knows all this when I know perfectly well that nobody
knows all this.» So there's a kind of a built in competition with
Steiner--- like «Yea, show me.» There is also a disadvantage in that the
people who find Steiner and come to the conclusion that he is
astonishing and that he does know what we need to know to survive, that
they then go a little further from saying «He knows the most» to saying
that «Everything he knows is true» and that there aren't important
developments that he didn't know anything about or that he
misunderstood. That's essential. Or else we make him into something he's
not, which is omniscient. It's destructive, actually. And it repels
people. Some say «He may be great, but I don't want to be involved with
the people around him. Yuck.» So that's a disadvantage. The other
disadvantage is that because he said so much there's a tendency to think
that it had a kind of finality, especially since there doesn't seem to
be anybody coming close behind who is approximate. Jung is fabulous. So
is Teilhard and so is Aurobindo. But it doesn't seem that they know more
or deeper. They just also know a lot in allied areas. So the dogmatic
tendency in people is reinforced by not only the extent of his
knowledge, but the confidence with which he speaks.

We in the United States, but I think in Western Europe generally, have
developed a necessary skill for anticipating the resistance of the
audience or the reader. When teaching, we hardly ever say, «This is
true, dammit,» or «What's wrong with you? Why don't you see this?
Anybody who doesn't see this is really, really stupid.» It's just
counterproductive. Even if we believe that we absolutely know the truth
of what we're saying, we'd find ways to say, «I would like you to
consider this. This seems to me to make sense. I think it's very useful
in this way. I think that this explains such and such, etc.»---all those
phrases that we have learned to use, I hope sincerely, but in any case
even if not, they are necessary ways of discourse and to use early 20th
century German-language, confident-statements is off-putting. It's not
that inviting. We don't like that. We like it more conversational, more
tentative, more respectful of the hearer or the reader. I mean, to a
much greater extent than Steiner exhibits. So that's another problem, a
limitation.

***Ashton Arnoldy:*** Well, you know, maybe that
confidence---obviously, it had some purpose---it was coming from
somewhere---maybe to ensure that Anthroposophy would stay, that it would
continue to be a force. But maybe we can end with some reflections on
the significance of Sophia, or the **sophianic**, in connection with
what you were just describing, because I think this respectfulness that
you are describing, as a professor, to the student or to the reader,
respecting their own process in coming to know something, I think, is
connected with the **sophianic**, the divine feminine, and
Sophia---Anthroposophy, as an approach to knowledge that isn't just the
dead intellect.

***Robert McDermott:*** It seems to me revealing that the figures who
I think about in **Kindred Spirits**, in addition to Steiner, Merton,
Teilhard, Jung, Aurobindo, all have a concept of a divine feminine. And
they don't always know exactly how to integrate it. And I think many of
their readers don't know how to integrate it, but they all have it. In
this case of Steiner, though the manifestation of Sophia that he is
focused on is called Anthroposophia, who he says is a Sophia being, who
is devoted at this time, particularly now -- not about 50 or 100 years
ago, but at this time -- is devoted to limiting, at least, or maybe
discrediting, and maybe even doing away with, materialism. So this
Anthroposophia is a being in service to human freedom and the spiritual
experience which is prevented by a thoroughly materialistic worldview,
because the materialistic worldview emphasizes a kind of a mechanism
that has an automatic quality to it, over against innovation,
imagination, experimentation, individuality and thinking and acting in
relation to one's individual, absolutely individual, karmic history. All
of that is part of the agenda of this being Anthroposophia. He's willing
to say, «Just call it Sophia, if you want,» but it does have different
manifestations. Isis is different from the Virgin Mary, who is different
again from Anthroposophia.

He thinks that this recent version, has arisen and is working, because
materialism is so powerful and is controlling human behavior in so many
ways at such a deep level that people have to join with this being and
another being like her, the Archangel Michael, the regent of the time
who is fighting the tempters. And what are they doing? They're trying to
beat the tempter, who he says is named **Ahriman**, who is in charge of
mindless, materialistic, automatic thinking. In other words, controlled
by technology, controlled by surface at the expense of depth and the
control increasingly of our relationships, which are completely external
and automatic. So there's no interior, unique, imaginative individual
depth. Those are all getting flattened by various kinds of technologies.
So it's not just relevant, it's desperately urgent because the evolution
of humanity depends on a loving relationship with everything that
exists. That, of course, includes the Earth. The Earth must be loved or
it will be destroyed. So it's desperately urgent.

***Robert McDermott is the former President and a recently retired,
long-term*** Professor at the California Institute of Integral Studies,
as well as the author of the books, ***The Essential Steiner***
and ***Steiner and Kindred Spirits***. In this interview with
Ashton Arnoldy, McDermott reflects on Anthroposophy in relation to
America and Rudolf Steiner in the context of other great thinkers.

Thanks to Das Goetheanum, November 4, 2022
