## EDUCATION AS A SOCIAL QUESTION

![](waldirf-class.jpg){class="alarge"}

## by Rudolf Steiner

### Lecture 2

for members of the Anthroposophical Society\
10 August 1919, Dornach -- GA 296

If we wish to understand the task of anthroposophical spiritual science
in the present and immediate future we must consider the character of
mankind\'s evolution since the middle of the fifteenth century.
Everything that happens now depends on the fact that since that time
there lives in mankind the impulse for each single individuality to
attain the pinnacle of personality, to become a whole personality. This
was not possible, nor was it the task of mankind in earlier epochs of
our post-Atlantean evolution. If we want to understand this great change
in the middle of which we find ourselves, we must focus our attention
still more precisely upon such matters as I characterized yesterday.

I said that in our spiritual life we still have a Greek constitution of
soul. The way we form our thoughts, the manner in which we are
accustomed to think about the world, is an echo of the Greek mind. And
the way we are accustomed to look at civic rights and everything
connected with them is an echo of the Roman mentality. In the State we
still see the structure as it existed in the Roman Empire. Only if
people will realize that the impulse of the threefold society must enter
our chaotic present will there be clarity in thinking and willing.

The Greek mentality was chiefly determined by the fact that in Greece
there existed in the highest degree what were the leading
characteristics of historical development right up to the middle of the
fifteenth century. Across the Greek territory there were spread a
subject population and their conquerors. These latter claimed the land
for themselves; but also, through their blood inheritance, they
determined the spirituality of ancient Greece. We cannot grasp the
soul-nature of the ancient Greeks unless we keep in mind that it was
considered justified to think about human relationships in the way that
resulted from the characteristics of the Aryan conqueror population.
Naturally, modern man has outgrown what lay at the basis of Greek
culture. With the Greeks it was self-evident that there were two kinds
of people: those who had to worship Mercury, and those who had to
worship Zeus. These two classes were strictly separated. Everything
resulted from the clash of a conquered and conquering people. One who
looks more closely into what lives socially among people of our time
will recognize that in our feelings and our subconscious we no longer
have this aristocratic attitude in viewing our world. Yet it still lives
in our ideas and concepts, especially if we are educated in the schools
of higher learning. These schools, especially the classical schools,
shape their instruction in a way that represents a renaissance, and echo
of Hellenism. And this is even more the case with our universities, with
the exception of the technical and agricultural colleges which have
sprung from modern life. Even they imitate in their outer form the
structure of universities derived from Hellenism. Through the very fact
that we have a high esteem for Hellenism in its time, and for its time,
we must also be quite clear about the necessity of a renewal of
spiritual/cultural life in our time. It will become more and more
unbearable for humanity to be led by those who have acquired their
concepts in our academic schools. And today, in almost all leading
positions, you find people who did receive the forming of their ideas in
the academic schools. It has become necessary today to realize that the
time of "settling accounts," not minor but major accounts, is at hand,
and that we must think about such matters factually and stop clinging to
old habits of thought.

You know that what was formed in Hellenism became abstract in Romanism.
The Greek social organism, which cannot be called a State organism,
shaped itself from forces descending through the bloodline. But this did
not pass over to Romanism. What did pass over was the urge to organize
as the Greeks had organized, but the cause of this organizing was no
longer felt to be in the bloodline. While it would never have occurred
to an ancient Greek to doubt that there are people of a "lower sort,"
those in a conquered people, and others being of a "higher sort," the
Aryans, this was not the case with the Romans. Within the Roman Empire
there was the strong consciousness that the order of the social organism
had been arrived at through power, through might. You need only remind
yourselves that the Romans trace their origin to that assembly of
robbers in the neighborhood of Rome that had been called together in
order, as a robber band, to found Rome; and that the founder of Rome was
not suckled with delicate mother\'s milk but, as you know, was suckled
in the forest by an animal, a wolf.

These are the influences that were taken up into the Roman nature and
led to the formation of the social order in Rome largely out of abstract
concepts. What has remained as our heritage in regard to the concepts of
rights and the State has thus come from the Roman mentality.

In this connection I am always reminded of an old friend of mine. I met
him when he was already quite advanced in years. In his youth, at the
age of eighteen, he had fallen in love with a girl and they had secretly
become engaged. But they were too poor to marry, so they waited and
remained faithful to each other. When he finally could consider
marriage, he was sixty-four years old, for only then had he acquired
enough means to risk taking such a step. So, he went to his home town
near Salzburg ready to marry his chosen one of so long ago. But alas,
the church and the rectory had burned down, and he could not get his
baptismal certificate. There was no record of his baptism anywhere, so
there was no proof that he had been born. I remember vividly the day his
letter arrived. It stated, "Well, I believe it is quite evident that I
was born, for after all I exist. But these people do not believe I was
born because there is no baptismal certificate to prove it."

I once had a conversation with a lawyer who said, "In a lawsuit it is
not so important whether or not a person is present; all we need is his
birth certificate."

Continually one meets such grotesque incidents. The attitudeliving in
them shows that our entire public life has been built to a greater or
lesser degree on Romanism. We are citizens of the world not through the
fact we have become and exist as human beings but because we are
recorded and recognized in a certain office. These things all lead back
to Romanism. The descent by bloodline has passed over into record
keeping.

Today the situation is such that many people no longer consider their
value determined by what they are as human beings but by the rank they
have reached in the hierarchy of officialdom. One prefers to be
something impersonal rather than a personality. Since the fifteenth
century, however, there exists in mankind the subconscious striving to
base everything on the pinnacle of personality. This shows us that in
regard to spiritual life and civil rights times have changed, and we
need a renewal of both, a real renewal. This is connected with many
deeper impulses of mankind\'s evolution.

Just consider the fact that since the middle of the fifteenth century
the evolution of modern man has been filled with the natural-scientific
mode of thought which is based on abstract laws of nature, upon sense
perception and the thoughts developed around it. Only what is derived
from sense perception is considered valid. Yesterday I drew your
attention to the fact that today there are quite a number of people who
are convinced, justifiably so, that a view of nature acquired in this
way can only lead to a ghost-like image of nature. A picture of the
world formed by a student of nature is a specter of the world, not the
real world. So, we have to say that humanity finds itself in the
position of developing a specter-image of the world in regard to one
half of it. For the science of initiation something profound is
concealed behind this, and what this is we must now consider.

Sense perception as such cannot be altered; whether we consider it to
be *maya* or something else is of no concern to a deeper world view. A
red flower is a red flower whether or not we think
it *maya* or *reality*. It is what it is. Likewise, all sense perception
is what it is. Discussion starts only when we begin to form thoughts
about it, when we consider it to be this or that, when we interpret it.
Only then the difficulty begins. It begins because the concepts we as
humans have to form since the fifteenth century are different from those
of earlier mankind. No attention is paid to this in modern history,
which is a *fable convenue*, as I have often stated. Whoever is able to
understand the concepts of mankind prior to the middle of the fifteenth
century knows that they were full of imagery, that they actually were
imaginations. The present abstraction of concepts exists only since that
time.

Now why has our human nature so developed that we have these abstract
concepts we are so proud of today and that we constantly employ? They
have the peculiar character that, although we make use of them in the
sense world they are not suited to this sense world. They are worthless
there. In my book, *Riddles of Philosophy*, I have expressed this by
saying that the way man forms his concepts regarding the external world
constitutes a side-stream of his soul development. Think of a seed in
the earth; it is destined by nature to become a plant. But we take many
seeds and grind them into flour and eat them as bread. This, however, is
not what the seed is meant for; it is a lateral development. If we ask,
doesn\'t the seed contain those chemical elements we need for building
up our body? we must say that it does not lie in the nature of the grain
of wheat or rye to nourish us but to bring forth new grain. Likewise, it
does not lie in our nature to grasp the outer world through the concepts
we have acquired since the fifteenth century. We shall reap something
different from those concepts if we enter into their nature properly.
These modern concepts are the shadow images of what we have experienced
in the spiritual world before birth --- more exactly, before conception.
Our concepts, the forces in them, are the echoes of what we have
experienced before birth. We misuse our system of concepts in applying
it to the outer sense world.

This is the basis of Goethe\'s concept of nature. He does not want to
express the laws of nature by means of concepts; he strives for the
primal phenomena. That is to say, he strives for the assembled outer
perceptions, because he feels that our conceptual ability cannot be
applied to external nature. We have to develop our conceptual ability
as *pure thinking*. If we do so, it points us toward our spiritual
existence prior to birth. Our modern thinking has been bestowed upon us
so that we may reach with this pure thinking our spiritual nature as it
existed before we were clothed with a physical body. If mankind does not
comprehend the fact that it possesses thinking in order to apprehend
itself as spirit, it does not grasp the task of the fifth post-Atlantean
period. Our natural science was inserted, so to say, into mankind\'s
destiny so that we might remain with pure nature and not speculate about
it. We were to employ our concepts to perceive it in the right way, and
then develop our concepts in order to behold ourselves as we existed in
spirit before we descended into the physical body. Men still believe
today that they should only employ their conceptual ability for
classifying external sense perceptions, and so on. However, they will
only act correctly if they employ the thoughts they have had since the
middle of the fifteenth century for perceiving the spiritual world in
which they existed before they acquired a physical body.

In this way man of the fifth post-Atlantean era is forced toward the
spiritual, toward the existence before birth. And still another factor
places him in a peculiar situation which he must develop. Parallel to
the specter-concepts of natural science runs industrialism, as I
mentioned yesterday. Its chief characteristic is the fact that the
machine, the bearer of industrialism, is spiritually transparent.
Nothing of it remains incomprehensible. As a consequence, the human will
directed toward the machine is, in truth, not directed toward a reality.
In terms of comprehensive reality the machine is a chimera.
Industrialism introduces something into our lives which in a higher
sense makes man\'s will meaningless. There will be a significant impact
on social life when modern men become convinced that the machine and
everything resulting from it, such as industrialism, makes the human
will meaningless. We have already reached the pinnacle of machine
activity. Today a quarter of all production on earth is not being
produced by human will but by machine power. This signifies something
extraordinary. Human will is no longer meaningful on earth.

If you read, for instance, the speeches of Rabindranath Tagore, you
ought to sense something in them that remains incomprehensible to the
European who employs his ordinary intellect. There is a different tone
in what an educated Asiatic has to say today, because in him this
adaptation of the European spirit to the machine is completely
incomprehensible. To the Oriental the activity of working by means of
machines, by means of industrialism, has no meaning. The European may
believe it or not, but European politics born in the machine age is also
just as senseless to the Oriental. In the educated Oriental\'s
statements there is clearly expressed that this one-fourth of human
labor in the present age is felt by him as senseless work --- this
quarter which is not carried out by the educated Orientals but only by
Occidentals and their imitators, the Japanese. The Oriental feels so
because, as he still possesses much clairvoyant vision, he knows that
labor performed by machines has a definite peculiarity. When a man plows
his field with his horse --- man and beast straining themselves in labor
--- this work in which natural forces are involved has a meaning beyond
the immediate present; it has cosmic meaning. When a man kindles fire by
using a flint, making the sparks ignite the tinder, he is connected with
nature. When the wasp builds its house this natural activity too has
cosmic meaning. Through modern industrialism we have abandoned cosmic
value. In our kindling of electric flames there no longer lives any
cosmic significance. It has been driven out. A completely mechanized
factory is a hole in the cosmos, it has no meaning for cosmic evolution.
If you go into the woods and collect firewood this has cosmic meaning
beyond earth evolution; but a modern factory and everything it contains
has no significance beyond earth development. The human will is inserted
in it without its having any cosmic value. Just consider what this
means. It means that since the middle of the fifteenth century we have
developed a knowledge that is ghost-like and does not touch reality.
More and more we employ machines and carry out an industrial activity,
and the will inserted into this activity is senseless for world
evolution.

The great question now confronts us: Is there nevertheless a meaning for
mankind\'s evolution as a whole in the fact that our knowledge is
ghost-like, and our will to a great extent senseless? Indeed, there is
meaning in it, significant meaning. Mankind thereby is to be urged to
penetrate beyond ghost-like thinking to a knowledge of reality that does
not stop with the perception of nature but enters into the spiritual
behind nature. So long as men received the spirit simultaneously with
their concepts they did not need to make efforts to gain the spirit.
Since in the modern age men have only retained concepts devoid of
spirit, but that also contain the possibility of working one\'s way up
to the spirit as I have stated, there is present in man the impulse to
proceed from abstract knowledge and to penetrate into genuine spiritual
knowledge. Therefore, since we have industrialism with its senselessness
we must seek another meaning for human will. This we can only do if we
arouse ourselves to a world view that brings sense into what is
senseless --- let us call it industrialism --- by deriving meaning from
the spiritual, saying: We seek tasks that stem from the spirit.
Formerly, when willing could derive its impulses from the spirit
instinctively, we did not need to arouse ourselves especially in order
to will from out the spirit. Today it is necessary that we make a
special effort to do this. The senseless industrial willing has to be
confronted with a meaningful willing-out-of-the-spirit.

Yesterday I gave you an example of the way we ought to educate. We
should recognize that up to the seventh year the human being is an
imitator since he develops chiefly his physical body during this period.
Imitation, therefore, ought to become the basis for that period of
education. We should know that from the seventh to the fourteenth year
we have to develop man by the principle of authority. This spiritual
knowledge, which we gain by knowing how the etheric body develops during
that time, must be made the impulse of education then. We should know
also how the astral body develops from the fourteenth to the
twenty-first year, and that this knowledge must lie behind education for
that, period. Then, only then, do we will out of the spirit.

Up to the middle of the fifteenth century man willed instinctively out
of the spirit. In external life we tend to immerse ourselves in
machines, in mechanism; this is so even in politics, which gradually has
turned governments into machines. We must strive for a spirit-ensouled
willing. To that end we must accept the idea of a science of the spirit.
We must, for instance, base education on what we know out of spiritual
facts, out of what we learn from anthroposophical spiritual science.
Through the stronger, more conscious emphasizing of willing out of the
spirit we establish a counter-image to the senseless willing of
industrialism.

Thus, industrialism with all its devastation of the human soul, is given
us in order that in this devastation we may rouse ourselves to will out
of the spirit. Our thinking has to be changed in many ways in our modern
age. This requires a careful, intimately developed feeling for truth. We
must become conscious that the feeling for truth has to be gradually
applied in places where we are not yet accustomed to apply it. I believe
many a person will be astonished today if he is told: You are right if
you venerate Raphael highly because of his pictures, but if you demand
that people paint the way Raphael painted then, you are mistaken. Only
he has a right to admire Raphael who knows that whoever paints today the
way he painted is a bad painter, because he does not paint as the
impulses of our time demand. One does not feel with the times if one
does not deeply sense the tasks of a given age. It is necessary that we
acquire in our time an intimate feeling for truth in this regard. But
here also modern humanity is caught up in what is the very opposite. One
gets the impression that the feeling for truth has everywhere sprung a
leak and does not function. People are shying away from calling right
what is right, and wrong what is wrong; they recoil from designating a
lie a lie. We experience today the most abominable things, and people
are indifferent to them. The point is that we should have such a feeling
for truth that we know, for example, that Raphael\'s painting no longer
fits our present age; that it must be considered as something of the
past and admired as such. It is particularly necessary now to pay
attention to such things when out of the depths of the soul the impulse
for truth comes over us. I am often reminded of a beautiful passage in
Herman Grimm\'s biography of Michelangelo in which he speaks of his Last
Judgment. He says that many such Last Judgment pictures were painted at
that time and that the people experienced in full reality the truth of
what was painted on the walls. They lived in the truth of those
pictures. Today we should not look at such a picture as Michelangelo\'s
Last Judgment without being aware that we do not feel as those people
did for whom the artist painted it; that we have lost their feeling and
at best can say: This is the picture of something we no longer believe
in as an immediate reality.

Just consider how differently man confronts such a picture with his
modern consciousness. He no longer thinks that angels really descend, or
that the devils carry on as they do in Michelangelo\'s picture. If,
however, one is aware that what modern man feels when looking at this
picture is something gray and abstract, then one is called upon inwardly
to experience the whole living movement in these pictures on the wall of
the Sistine Chapel. One is stirred to asking how it was possible for the
people of Michelangelo\'s time (although he painted after the decline of
the fourth post-Atlantean period his paintings originated in the spirit
of that period since he stood at the boundary of the fourth and fifth
periods) --- how was it possible for people like him and his
contemporaries to experience such tremendous imaginations, such mighty
pictures? This question confronts us in all its magnitude if one is
conscious of how drab and lifeless is what man feels today in front of
such a picture by Michelangelo. We must ask: What caused human souls of
that time to conceive of the earth\'s end in such a way? Whence came the
structure of these pictures?

The reason lies in the following: Since the time when the Mystery of
Golgotha entered earth evolution and had given it its meaning, certain
things that existed in the ancient manner had to recede into the
background and were destined to be regained by mankind later on. One of
these was the idea of repeated earth lives. The totality of human life
takes its course through earth life, then life in the spiritual world,
then earth life again, and so on. This course of the total life of man
was the content of the atavistic, instinctive world-view in ancient
times. Christianity had to arouse in man concepts different from those
of ancient wisdom. By what means, above all, has Christianity
accomplished this? It directed human consciousness only to a certain
point in time, namely, to the beginning of one\'s life on earth. It did
not consider man as an individuality prior to birth or conception but
merely as a thought of the Godhead. Before earth-life man proceeds out
of the spiritual world as a thought of the Godhead, only at birth did he
begin to be a real human being. Then, after his life on earth, the life
after death. In the first period of the development of Christianity the
experience of repeated earth lives was, so to say, misplaced. Human
experience was limited to looking into the origin of man and life after
death. This, however, supplied the equilibrium out of which the pictures
of the Last Judgment were created. Through the fact that Christianity
first eradicated from human feeling the teaching of pre-existence, the
pictures of the Last Judgment could arise. Today there wells up again
out of the deep recesses of the human soul the longing for a recognition
of repeated earth lives. Therefore, those pictures fade away which only
focus their attention upon the one earth life and a vague spiritual
world before and after it. Now there exists the most intense longing to
enlarge the Christian world-view of the early ages. The Mystery of
Golgotha is not merely effective for those who believe only in one earth
life, it is also valid for those who know of repeated earth lives. The
present age is in need of this enlargement. Therefore, we should see
clearly that we live in a period when we must use the ghost-like nature
of ordinary conceptual knowledge, and the senselessness of willing
released by industrialism, in order to rise to spiritual knowledge and
spirit-permeated willing, as I have described it; and also, in order to
enlarge religious consciousness so as to include repeated earth lives.

The great and full importance of this enlargement of human consciousness
in the present time should be deeply inscribed in the soul of modern
men, for upon this depends whether they really understand how to live in
the present, and how to prepare the future in the right sense. Everyone,
in the situation in which life has placed him, can make use of this
enlarged consciousness. Even the external knowledge people gain will
cause him to demand something that today plays a large role in the
subconscious depths of soul life but that has difficulty in rising and
sounding out into full consciousness. Truly, the most striking fact of
modern life is that there are so many torn human souls; souls full of
problems who do not know what to do with life, who ask again and again,
"What precisely is my task? What does life mean to do specifically with
me?" They start this or that and yet are never satisfied. The number of
these problematic natures increases steadily. What is the reason for it?
It comes from a lack in our educational system. Today we educate our
children in a way which does not awaken in them the forces that make man
strong for life. Man becomes strong through being an imitator up to his
seventh year; through following a worthy authority up to the fourteenth
year; and through the fact that his capacity for love is developed in
the right way up to the twenty-first year. Later on this strength cannot
be developed. What a person lacks because the forces were not awakened
which should have been awakened in definite periods of his youth ---
this is what makes him a problem-filled nature. *This fact must be made
known!*

For this reason, I had to say yesterday that if we will to bring about a
true form of society in future it must be prepared through people\'s
education. To this end we must not proceed in a small way but on a large
scale; for our educational system has gradually taken on a character
that leads directly to what I described yesterday as mechanization of
the spirit, vegetablizing of the soul, and animalization of the body.

We must not follow this direction. We must strongly develop the forces
that *can* be developed in a child\'s soul, so that later on he can
harvest the fruits of his childhood learning. Today he looks back and
feels what his childhood was and cannot gather anything from it because
nothing was developed there. Our educational principles must be
fundamentally changed if we want to do the right thing for children.
Above everything we must listen very carefully to much that at present
is highly praised and considered especially wholesome.

So, it is necessary that, without undue strain and exertion but through
an economy of educational effort, children acquire concentration. This
can be achieved, in the way modern man needs it, only by abolishing what
is so greatly favored today, namely, that cursed curriculum, a murderous
instrument for the real development of human forces. Just consider what
it means: From 7 to 8 A.M. arithmetic, from 8 to 9 grammar, from 9 to 10
geography, from 10 to 11 history. Everything that has moved through the
mind from 7 to 8 is extinguished from 8 to 9, and so on. Now here it is
necessary to get down to the bottom of things. We must no longer think
that subjects exist in order to be taught as *subjects*. On the
contrary, we must have clearly in mind that in children from the seventh
to fourteenth year, *thinking, feeling*, and *willing* have to be
developed in the right way. Geography, arithmetic, everything must be
employed so that these faculties can be properly developed.

Much is said in modern pedagogy about the need of developing
individualities, of paying attention to a child\'s nature in order to
know which faculties should be developed. This is empty talk. These
questions take on meaning only when they are discussed from the point of
view of spiritual science, otherwise they are mere phrases. In the
future it will be necessary to say that for a certain age group we must
impart a certain amount of arithmetic. Two or three months are to be
devoted to teaching arithmetic in the forenoon. Not a plan of study that
contains everything jumbled up but arithmetic for an extended time, then
on to another subject. Arrange things as they are indicated by human
nature itself for definite points in time.

You see the tasks that arise for a pedagogy which works toward the
future. Here lie the positive problems for those who seriously think
about the social future. As yet there is little understanding for these
problems. In Stuttgart, connected with our previous activities, a school
is to be built up as far as possible within the present school system.
Mr. Molt has decided to found such a school for the children of his
employees in the Waldorf-Astoria Cigarette Factory. Other children will
be able to come, but at first of course only in limited numbers.
Naturally, we will have to take into account the educational goals of
the State. The children will have to achieve this and that by the end of
a year, and we will have to make certain compromises. But we will be
able to intermix something with what the State requires, because,
according to socialistic ideas, the State is the especially clever idol.
So, we shall have to intermix with what it demands that which is
required by the real nature of man. This has to be recognized. But who
today thinks of the fact that the prevailing plan of study is the
assassin of truly human education? There are people whose thoughts in
this direction are such that one is inclined to say: The world stands on
its head, one has to turn it back on its legs. For many would shorten
the lessons and change the subjects every half hour. This today is
considered ideal. Just imagine: Religion, arithmetic, geography,
drawing, singing, one after the other. In our heads they tumble through
each other like the stones of a kaleidoscope. Only the outer world says,
"Now that\'s something like it!" --- because there is not the slightest
interrelating between these subjects.

Few believe it is necessary now to think on a large scale; not to think
petty thoughts but to have great, comprehensive views. We experience
again and again that people finally have become accustomed to saying,
"Indeed, revolution is necessary!" Even a large part of the bourgeoisie
believes today in revolution. I do not know if that is the case here,
but there are large areas where a majority of the bourgeoisie believes
revolution to be necessary. But if we offer them such things as are
stated in my book, *Toward a Threefold Society -- Basic Issues of the
Social Question*, they say: "We do not understand this. It is too
complicated." Lichtenberg once said, "If a head and a book strike
together and a hollow sound results it is not necessarily the fault of
the book." But people do not believe this, because --- it is not
self-knowledge that is chiefly produced in men\'s souls. One can
experience that throughout extensive regions the philistines believe in
revolution, yet they say, "O no, we cannot enter into such deep
questions, such comprehensive thoughts; you must tell us how shoe
production can be socialized, how the pharmacies are to be socialized,"
and so on. "You must tell us how, in the revolutionized State, I can
sell my spices."

One gradually discovers then what these people really mean. They mean
that they agree there must be a revolution, but everything should remain
as it has been, nothing should be changed by it. Many a person asks, how
can we make the world over? --- but so that nothing is changed! The most
remarkable ones in this respect are the so-called intellectuals. With
them one can have the most extraordinary experiences. One heard it
repeatedly stated, "Very well, three members --- autonomous
universities, a spiritual life that governs itself --- but then, how
shall we live? Who will pay our salaries if the State no longer pays
us?"

Today we really have to confront these things. It is necessary that we
stop turning away from these questions again and again. Precisely in the
sphere of the spiritual/cultural life a change must be brought about.

Continued in the next issue of SCR.

[Lecture One](https://southerncrossreview.org/149/steiner-education-social.html)
