# Nuclear Fusion Won't Save the Climate

### But It Might Blow Up the World

## BY [**JOSHUA FRANK**](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/joshuafrank/)

I awoke on December 13th to news about what could be the most
significant scientific breakthrough since the Food and Drug
Administration authorized the first Covid vaccine for emergency use two
years ago. This time, however, the achievement had nothing to do with
that ongoing public health crisis. Instead, as the** *New York
Times *and CNN alerted me that morning, at stake was a new technology
that could potentially solve the worst dilemma humanity faces: climate
change and the desperate overheating of our
planet. [**Net-energy-gain**](https://www.energy.gov/articles/doe-national-laboratory-makes-history-achieving-fusion-ignition) fusion,
a long-sought-after panacea for all that's wrong with traditional
nuclear-fission energy (read: accidents, radioactive waste), had finally
been achieved at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in
California.

"This is such a wonderful example of a possibility realized, a
scientific milestone achieved, and a road ahead to the possibilities for
clean
energy," [**exclaimed**](https://www.powermag.com/fusion-breakthrough-brings-cheers-though-challenges-remain/) White
House science adviser Arati Prabhakar.

[]{#anchor}The** *New York Times* was [**quick to
follow**](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/13/science/nuclear-fusion-energy-breakthrough.html) Prabhakar's
lead, boasting that fusion is an "energy source devoid of the pollution
and greenhouse gasses caused by the burning of fossil fuels." Even Fox
News, not exactly at the top of anyone's list of places focused on
climate change, jumped on
the [**bandwagon**](https://www.foxnews.com/science/us-scientists-produce-first-successful-nuclear-fusion-reaction-net-energy-gain),
declaring fusion "a technology that has the potential to accelerate the
planet's shift away from fossil fuels and produce nearly limitless,
carbon-free energy."

All in all, the reviews for fusion were positively glowing and it seemed
to make instant sense. What could possibly be wrong with something that
might end our reliance on fossil fuels, even as it reduced the risks
posed by our [**aging nuclear
industry**](https://thebulletin.org/2019/08/aging-nuclear-plants-industry-cost-cutting-and-reduced-safety-oversight-a-dangerous-mix/)?
The message, repeated again and again in the days that followed: this
was a genuine global-warming game-changer.

After all, in the fusion process, no atoms have to be split to create
heat. Gigantic lasers are used, not uranium, so there's no toxic mining
involved, nor do thousands of gallons of cold water have to be pumped in
to cool overheated reactors, nor will there be radioactive waste
byproducts lasting hundreds of thousands of years. *And not a risk of a
nuclear meltdown in sight!* Fusion, so the cheery news went, is safe,
effective, and efficient!

Or is it?

**The Big Catch**

On a very basic level, fusion is the [**stuff of
stars**](http://butane.chem.uiuc.edu/pshapley/GenChem1/L1/3.html).
Within the Earth's sun, hydrogen combines with helium to create heat in
the form of sunlight. Inside the walls of the Livermore Lab, this
natural process was imitated by blasting 192 gigantic lasers into a tube
the size of a baby's toe. Inside that cylinder sat a "hydrogen-encased
diamond." When the laser shot through the small hole, it destroyed that
diamond quicker than the blink of an eye. In doing so, it created a
bunch of invisible x-rays that compressed a small pellet of deuterium
and tritium, which scientists refer to as "heavy hydrogen."

"In a brief moment lasting less than 100 trillionths of a second, 2.05
megajoules of energy --- roughly the equivalent of a pound of TNT ---
bombarded the hydrogen
pellet,"[ ](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/13/science/nuclear-fusion-energy-breakthrough.html)[**explained**](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/13/science/nuclear-fusion-energy-breakthrough.html) *New
York Times* reporter Kenneth Chang. "Out flowed a flood of neutron
particles --- the product of fusion --- which carried about 3 megajoules
of energy, a factor of 1.5 in energy gain."

As with so many breakthroughs, there was a catch. First, 3 megajoules
isn't much energy. After all, it takes [**360,000
megajoules**](https://twitter.com/Insulfoam/status/1408515554470764544/photo/1) to
create 300 hours of light from a single 100-watt light bulb. So,
Livermore's fusion development isn't going to electrify a single home,
let alone a million homes, anytime soon. And there was another nagging
issue with this little fusion creation as well: it took 300 megajoules
to power up those 192 lasers. Simply put, at the moment, they require
100 times *more* energy to charge than the energy they ended up
producing.

"The reality is that fusion energy will not be viable at scale anytime
within the next decade, a time frame over which carbon emissions must be
reduced by 50% to avoid catastrophic warming of more than
1.5°C,"[ ](https://news.yahoo.com/why-the-nuclear-fusion-breakthrough-wont-prevent-catastrophic-climate-change-202616499.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAKotEOrS9Ug45vlAJibQg7zVDMWiW7-6Xv9zabxaRMH0Ty0fJBo72ksZf4YldQunHwa0dVuuhVvzNHfNEtFdtcfzoSqFs87x5fn6NwhyVlGOObkV_kuAQEzaqi4MHvDPy4vclPUuoDfkf34McCTI9Cxc-EvpuZT9_4p6XwWAZYPj)[**says**](https://news.yahoo.com/why-the-nuclear-fusion-breakthrough-wont-prevent-catastrophic-climate-change-202616499.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAKotEOrS9Ug45vlAJibQg7zVDMWiW7-6Xv9zabxaRMH0Ty0fJBo72ksZf4YldQunHwa0dVuuhVvzNHfNEtFdtcfzoSqFs87x5fn6NwhyVlGOObkV_kuAQEzaqi4MHvDPy4vclPUuoDfkf34McCTI9Cxc-EvpuZT9_4p6XwWAZYPj) climate
expert Michael Mann, a professor of earth and environmental science at
the University of Pennsylvania. "That task will only be achievable
through the scaling up of existing clean energy --- renewable sources
such as wind and solar --- along with energy storage capability and
efficiency and conservation measures."

**Tritium Trials and Tribulations**

The secretive and heavily secured [**National Ignition
Facility**](https://www.llnl.gov/news/national-ignition-facility-achieves-fusion-ignition) where
that test took place is the size of a sprawling sports arena. It could,
in fact, hold three football fields. Which makes me wonder: how much
space would be needed to do fusion on a commercial scale? No good answer
is yet available. Then there's the trouble with that isotope tritium
needed to help along the fusion reaction. It's not easy to come by and
costs about as much as diamonds, around \$30,000 per gram. Right now,
even some of the bigwigs at the Department of Defense [**are
worried**](https://www.defensenews.com/opinion/commentary/2017/03/06/commentary-the-looming-crisis-for-us-tritium-production/) that
we're running out of usable tritium.  

"Fusion advocates often boast that the fuel for their reactors will be
cheap and plentiful. That is certainly true for
deuterium,"[ ](https://www.science.org/content/article/fusion-power-may-run-fuel-even-gets-started)[**writes**](https://www.science.org/content/article/fusion-power-may-run-fuel-even-gets-started) Daniel
Clery in *Science*. "Roughly one in every 5,000 hydrogen atoms in the
oceans is deuterium, and it sells for about \$13 per gram. But tritium,
with a half-life of 12.3 years, exists naturally only in trace amounts
in the upper atmosphere, the product of cosmic ray bombardment."

Fusion boosters brush this unwelcome fact aside, pointing out that
"tritium breeding" --- a process in which tritium is endlessly produced
in a loop-like fashion --- is entirely possible in a fully operating
fusion reactor. In theory, this may seem plausible, but you need a bunch
of tritium to jumpstart the initial chain reaction and doubt abounds
that there's enough of it out there to begin with. On top of that, the
reactors themselves will have to be lined with a lot of lithium, itself
an expensive chemical element at [**\$71 a
kilogram**](https://www.dailymetalprice.com/metalpricecharts.php?c=li&u=kg&d=240) (copper,
by contrast, is around \$9.44 a kilogram), to allow the process to work
correctly.

Then there's also a commonly repeated misstatement that fusion doesn't
create significant radioactive waste, a haunting reality for the world's
current fleet of nuclear plants. True, plutonium, which can be used as
fuel in atomic weapons, isn't a natural byproduct of fusion, but tritium
is the *radioactive* form of hydrogen. Its little isotopes are great at
permeating metals and finding ways to escape tight enclosures.
Obviously, this will pose a significant problem for those who want to
continuously breed tritium in a fusion reactor. It also presents a
concern for people worried about radioactivity making its way out of
such facilities and into the environment.

"Cancer is the main risk from humans ingesting tritium. When tritium
decays it spits out a low-energy electron (roughly 18,000 electron
volts) that escapes and slams into DNA, a ribosome, or some other
biologically important molecule," David
Biello [**explains**](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/is-radioactive-hydrogen-in-drinking-water-a-cancer-threat/) in *Scientific
American*. "And, unlike other radionuclides, tritium is usually part of
water, so it ends up in all parts of the body and therefore can, in
theory, promote any kind of cancer. But that also helps reduce the risk:
any tritiated water is typically excreted in less than a month."

If that sounds problematic, that's because it is. This country's
above-ground atomic bomb testing in the 1950s and 1960s was responsible
for most of the man-made tritium that's lingering in the environment.
And it will be at least 2046, 84 years after the last American
atmospheric nuclear detonation in Nevada, before tritium there will no
longer pose a problem for the area.

Of course, tritium also escapes from our existing nuclear reactors and
is [**routinely
found**](https://www.ap.org/press-releases/2012/part-ii-ap-impact-tritium-leaks-found-at-many-nuke-sites) near
such facilities where it occurs
"[**naturally**](https://www.nrc.gov/reactors/operating/ops-experience/tritium/faqs.html)"
during the fission process. In fact, after Illinois farmers discovered
their wells had been contaminated by the nearby Braidwood nuclear plant,
they successfully sued the site's operator Exelon, which, in 2005, was
caught
discharging[ ](https://cen.acs.org/articles/84/i26/Radioactive-Leaks-Found-Reactors.html)[**6.2
million
gallons**](https://cen.acs.org/articles/84/i26/Radioactive-Leaks-Found-Reactors.html) of
tritium-laden water into the soil.

In the United States, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) allows the
industry to monitor for tritium releases at nuclear sites; the industry
is politely asked to alert the NRC in a "timely manner" if tritium is
either intentionally or accidentally released. But a [**June 2011
report**](https://www.gao.gov/assets/a319325.html) issued by the
Government Accountability Office cast doubt on the NRC's archaic system
for assessing tritium discharges, suggesting that it's anything but
effective. ("Absent such an assessment, we continue to believe that NRC
has no assurance that the Groundwater Protection Initiative will lead to
prompt detection of underground piping system leaks as nuclear power
plants age.") 

Consider all of this a way of saying that, if the NRC isn't doing an
adequate job of monitoring tritium leaks already occurring with
regularity at the country's nuclear plants, how the heck will it do a
better job of tracking the stuff at fusion plants in the future? And as
I suggest in my new book, [***Atomic Days: The Untold Story of the Most
Toxic Place in
America***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598283/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
the NRC is plain awful at just about everything it does.

**Instruments of Death**

All of that got me wondering: if tritium, vital for the fusion process,
is radioactive, and if they aren't going to be operating those lasers in
time to put the brakes on climate change, what's really going on here?

Maybe some clues lie (as is so often the case) in history. The initial
idea for a fusion reaction was proposed by English physicist Arthur
Eddington in 1920. More than 30 years later, on November 1, 1952, the
first full-scale U.S. test of a thermonuclear device, "Operation Ivy,"
took place in the Marshall Islands in the Pacific Ocean. It yielded a
mushroom-cloud explosion from a fusion reaction equivalent in its power
to 10.4 Megatons of TNT. That was 450 times more powerful than the
atomic bomb the U.S. had dropped on the Japanese city of Nagasaki only
seven years earlier to end World War II. It created an underwater crater
6,240 feet wide and 164 feet deep.

"The Shot, as witnessed aboard the various vessels at sea, is not easily
described," noted a [**military
report**](https://time.com/4096424/ivy-mike-history/) on that nuclear
experiment. "Accompanied by a brilliant light, the heat wave was felt
immediately at distances of thirty to thirty-five miles. The tremendous
fireball, appearing on the horizon like the sun when half-risen, quickly
expanded after a momentary hover time."

Nicknamed "Ivy Mike," the bomb was a Teller-Ulam thermonuclear device,
named after its creators Edward Teller and Stanislaw Ulam. It was also
the United States' first full-scale hydrogen bomb, an altogether
different beast than the two awful nukes dropped on Japan in August
1945. Those bombs utilized fission in their cores to create massive
explosions. But Ivy Mike gave a little insight into what was still
possible for future weapons of annihilation.

The details of how the Teller-Ulam device works are still classified,
but historian of science Alex Wellerstein [**explained the concept**](https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/a-hydrogen-bomb-by-any-other-name) well
in the *New Yorker*:

"The basic idea is, as far as we know, as follows. Take a fission weapon
--- call it the primary. Take a capsule of fusionable material, cover it
with depleted uranium, and call it the secondary. Take both the primary
and the secondary and put them inside a radiation case --- a box made of
very heavy materials. When the primary detonates, radiation flows out of
it, filling the case with X rays. This process, which is known as
radiation implosion, will, through one mechanism or another... compress
the secondary to very high densities, inaugurating fusion reactions on a
large scale. These fusion reactions will, in turn, let off neutrons of
such a high energy that they can make the normally inert depleted
uranium of the secondary's casing undergo fission."

Got it? Ivy Mike was, in fact, a *fission* explosion that [**initiated
a **](https://blog.ucsusa.org/dylan-spaulding/what-does-a-nuclear-fusion-breakthrough-mean-for-energy-production-and-nuclear-weapons/)[***fusion***](https://blog.ucsusa.org/dylan-spaulding/what-does-a-nuclear-fusion-breakthrough-mean-for-energy-production-and-nuclear-weapons/)[** reaction**](https://blog.ucsusa.org/dylan-spaulding/what-does-a-nuclear-fusion-breakthrough-mean-for-energy-production-and-nuclear-weapons/).
But ultimately, the science of how those instruments of death work isn't
all that important. The takeaway here is that, since first tried out in
that monstrous Marshall Islands explosion, fusion has been intended as a
tool of war. And sadly, so it remains, despite all the publicity about
its possible use some distant day in relation to climate change. In
truth, any fusion breakthroughs are potentially of critical importance
not as a remedy for our warming climate but for a future apocalyptic
world of war. Despite all the fantastic media publicity, that's how the
U.S. government has always seen it and that's why the latest fusion test
to create "energy" was executed in the utmost secrecy at the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory. One thing should be taken for granted:
the American government is interested not in using fusion technology to
power the energy grid, but in using it to
further [**strengthen**](https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/6412035) this
country's already [**massive
arsenal**](https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Fact-Sheet_Unclass_2021_final-v2-002.pdf) of
atomic weapons.

Consider it an irony, under the circumstances, but in its announcement
about the success at Livermore --- though this obviously wasn't what
made the headlines --- the Department of Energy didn't skirt around the
issue of gains for future atomic weaponry. Jill Hruby, the department's
undersecretary for nuclear security, admitted that, in achieving a
fusion ignition, researchers had "opened a new chapter in NNSA's
science-based Stockpile Stewardship Program." (NNSA stands for the
National Nuclear Security Administration.) That "chapter" Hruby was
bragging about has a lot more to do with
"[**modernizing**](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7)"
the country's nuclear weapons capabilities than with using laser fusion
to end our reliance on fossil fuels.

"Had we not pursued the hydrogen bomb," Edward Teller once said, "there
is a very real threat that we would now all be speaking Russian. I have
no regrets." Some attitudes die hard.

Buried deep in the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory's website, the
government comes clean about what these fusion experiments at
the [**\$3.5
billion**](https://physicstoday.scitation.org/do/10.1063/pt.6.2.20210817a/full/) National
Ignition Facility (NIF) are [**really all
about**](https://lasers.llnl.gov/science/nif-and-stockpile-stewardship):

"NIF's high energy density and inertial confinement fusion experiments,
coupled with the increasingly sophisticated simulations available from
some of the world's most powerful supercomputers, increase our
understanding of weapon physics, including the properties and
survivability of weapons-relevant materials... The high rigor and
multidisciplinary nature of NIF experiments play a key role in
attracting, training, testing, and retaining new generations of skilled
stockpile stewards who will continue the mission to protect America into
the future."

Yes, despite all the media attention to climate change, this is a rare
yet intentional admission, surely meant to frighten officials in China
and Russia. It leaves little doubt about what this fusion breakthrough
means. It's not about creating future clean energy and never has been.
It's about "protecting" the world's greatest capitalist superpower.
Competitors beware.

Sadly, fusion won't save the Arctic from melting, but if we don't put a
stop to it, that breakthrough technology could someday melt us all.

Copyright 2023 Joshua Frank

Featured image: [**Atom Bomb Nuclear Explosion**](https://www.flickr.com/photos/51686021@N07/33230171512/in/photolist-SCrjgA-Hj2w4-2nE8DJd-bfWqC2-D9JJB3-5BVx8A-5Uqgoe-2nLeFtA-Rm6sad-6qqU4C-56GXgZ-2m1qCuo-AMyjwv-8RdB7u-AnZicy-53kpqR-55rxu4-5HjJLT-XuACfa-2h9mrNe-AJMcdU-2nLudbi-sQBEg9-J4HuYA-2mbxiAP-2iBAoHi-2mKMPuM-2ju1zrw-LAndqz-qacDmq-7LEpVN-em8KKx-2gZPrDm-2i3ReWD-2jywjfF-8eCqKG-du519T-2m8NN2k-ZtLz6Y-Z613uJ-TyJgmq-2hcrxp1-22QeaR-8T6piT-3mBG1G-7Nv4g3-aM1Ys-uzDxjG-Rt2vP-673nBN) by [**Burnt
Pineapple Productions**](https://www.flickr.com/photos/51686021@N07/) is
licensed under [**CC0
1.0**](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) / Flickr

Follow TomDispatch on [***Twitter***](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch) and
join us on [***Facebook***](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch).
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[**Songlands**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** *(the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel [**Every Body Has a
Story**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), and
Tom Engelhardt's [**A Nation Unmade by
War**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
as well as Alfred McCoy's [**In the Shadows of the American Century: The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global Power**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), John
Dower's [**The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World War
II**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), and
Ann Jones's [**They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from America's Wars: The Untold Story**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

**Joshua Frank** is an award-winning California-based journalist and co-editor of [***CounterPunch***](https://www.counterpunch.org/). He is
the author of the new book [***Atomic Days: The Untold Story of the Most
Toxic Place in
America***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598283/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[ ](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598283/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)(Haymarket
Books).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com)
