![](goya-letter.jpg){class="a"}

# Letters to the Editor

RE: [Breathe](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html)

I absolutely love this piece of poetry. Recently, having a very hard
time with a ridiculously troublesome divorce, this makes so much sense
to me, It\'s sad. Marybeth Fletcher

\*

I too like to think that I am a poet but of course only others may say
that. You, however, I am glad and encouraged by heart to speak the truth
to say, are a poet. 

This is the first time I have read \"Breathe\" and I am enchanted by it.
Thank you for your effort and for allowing me the privilege of having
the great honor of the enlightenment it brings to me.

Ronald Daniel Gillen

AKA Daniel Converse

\*

I just listened to a podcast from Meghan Markle\'s \"Archetypes\" series
and she concluded by reading Becky Hemsley\'s poem \"Breathe\"
(<https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html>) \... wow !!
;-D

I\'m a bit lost for words in the wake of this poem but want to send this
\"fan girl\" email to say thanx !! ;-D

Gratefully & Semi-Breathlessly,

Vivian Wuarchose

\*

I absolutely totally loved this poem, although on the whole I don't do
terribly well with poetry. It mostly goes right over my head! But please
please correct it's to its in your review!!!! "and it's consistencies
with human emotion. "

Bad form.  I look forward to reading more. 

Best,

Daniella 

Corrected, with thanks. (Ed.)

\_\_\_

RE: [The Necessity of a truly Free Education](https://southerncrossreview.org/145/education-free.html)

Hi Frank,

I hope this finds you well. Happy New Year!

I nominated your (& colleagues) paper, *The Necessity of Truly Free
Education,* in the Nonfiction Articles category of the 25th Annual
Critters Readers Poll.

Here\'s the link to vote, if you like:

<https://critters.org/predpoll/nonfiction.shtml>

And here\'s the link for current standings:

<https://critters.org/predpoll/tally_nonfiction.ht>

Thanks again!

Cheers,

Justin

Starship Sloane Publishing

\_\_\_\_\_

RE: [American Exceptionalism on Full Display](https://southerncrossreview.org/150/gordon-exceptional.html)

I would like this article printed on everyone\'s front page computer, on
their minds along with a hard slap on their cheeks! Such ignorance,
stupidity, and other words I can\'t remember at the moment having to do
with so many other shortcomings of the amerrikkkan mentality. They buy
the pap, the fairy tale, the lies and propaganda and revel in the myths
of what is going on in this selfish place. Despite spending all kinds of
money on military expansion, ughhhhh!!!! There\'s no point in even
repeating all of that. I completely agree with Gordon! And , by the way,
Rochester has one of the highest rates of child poverty in the country!
It has one of the worst public school systems and a high murder rate.
It\'s also interesting to note that there is so little anger towards the
system from people who suffer most. That\'s enough. Just one thing, it
is so difficult to get this truth out to the world, or even to the
people who could learn something about it in this country!

Barbara Fox

Rochester, New York

\_\_\_\_\_

RE: [Intergalactic Reincarnation](https://southerncrossreview.org/150/mireya-intergalactic.html)

Gracias Frank por traerme recuerdos de Mireya y por tus pensamientos.
Seguro nos volveremos encontrar en nuestra próxima reencarnación.

Un abrazo

Monica Waldman

\*

This is thought provoking and beautiful thank you.

Lyndi Whalen

\_\_\_\_\_

RE: Journey to the Stars [Journey to the Stars](https://southerncrossreview.org/149/journey-to-stars.html)

Dear Frank,

thank you for this journey! \"Now I must return to the fountain for more
water. My bottle is almost empty\" :)

Cheers, Norbert Hanny

\_\_\_\_\_

[The Universe as Hologram](https://southerncrossreview.org/9/hologram.htm)

That was a terrific article and, as a social commentator, has opened my
mind beyond anything I have previously experienced.

What immediately jumped into my mind was that we all have different
perceptions of the same thing, be it theory or 'solid' state and is yet
another aspect of our interconnectedness and life as a holograph.

Thank you so much for placing this information in an arena where
non-scientists such as myself can learn. A fabulous start to 2023.

Kindest.

John Coombes

\*\*\*
