#To Love a spy

### from Berlin to Buenos Aires

## By **Frank Thomas Smith**

> > *She was beautiful in appearance, and was very lovely to behold...No one
> > spoke ill of her, for she feared God with great devotion.
> > Judith 7/8*

### Foreword

#### Florida, Buenos Aires, Argentina

*Cerrado* read the sign hanging slightly askew inside the upper glass
part of Die Glocke's door. What the hell, Jacks thought, it's lunch
time, how can they be closed. Something's wrong. He peered through the
glass and saw the old waiter sitting alone at a table reading the *Freie
Presse*, a fascist German-language daily. He knocked on the window. The
waiter looked up, startled and stared wide-eyed at the door. When he
recognized Marvin Jacks he put down the paper, smiled, stood up heavily
and opened the door after unlocking it.

"You called for a reservation," he said in German, "*nicht wahr*?"

Jacks nodded. "Why is the restaurant closed? Has something happened?"

"Yes, I'm afraid so." He pulled out a chair from the table he had been
sitting at. "Please sit down, Herr Jacks, I have a *mensaje* for you
from Frau Marie," he said in "Belgrano-Deutsch", a mixture of German and
Spanish used by long time German residents. Jacks remained standing
while the waiter hurried into the kitchen and returned immediately
clutching a piece of notebook paper. He smiled. "They let her write it
when she said it was instructions for picking up her daughter at school.
They told me to translate it. They are really stupid, because if it was
for me, which she said it was, why would she have to write it out.
Anyway, here it is." Jacks read it. *Herr Jacks, Bitte, holen Sie meine
Tochter von der Schule ab, um ein-uhr: Rudolf-Steiner-Schule, Warnes
1331*. She signed it: *Marie Clement*

"She told me to give it to you," the waiter said.

"What happened? Where is she? What's your name, by the way?"

"Knoblauch -- Federico Knoblauch," the waiter answered, somewhat
intimidated by Jacks' height and staccato questions. He, like us all,
wanted to be loved.

"Tell me what happened, Federico."

"They came about an hour ago and took Frau Marie and Herr Clement."

Jacks sat down to calm himself. The waiter considered it a friendly
gesture and sat across from him.

"Who took them?"

The waiter shrugged: "S.I.D.E., you know, state security. They didn't
say so, but you could tell by the green Falcon they parked outside,
everyone knows that. Herr Clement went out the back door, but one of
them was waiting out in the back, he must have entered through the
neighbor's garden, and brought him back in. He said he had gone out for
a breath of fresh air, but I think he was trying to get away. Are you a
friend of theirs? I remember seeing you here once."

"Yes, a friend."

"Will you pick up their daughter like she asks in the note?"

Jacks look at his watch: 12:45. "Yes, of course. It\'s almost one, I'll
have to hurry."

"What do you think will happen?" the waiter asked, wringing his hands.
"What should I do?"

"It's probably a mistake," Jacks said. "You might as well go home and
check here tomorrow to see if they've returned."

"But what if they haven't returned?"

Jacks stood up, said "*Auf Wiedersehen, danke*," and strode to the door.

"*Ich danke Ihnen, se√±or*," the waiter said as he let Jacks out.

The Rudolf Steiner Schule stood out in the neighbourhood because of its
unusual design -- nothing square, not even the windows. The place looked
like it had been built by a drunken bricklayer. Yet somehow it was
attractive, stimulating. Jacks walked into the room marked *Oficina* and
handed the note to an oldish, hard-looking matron who read it
myopically. She took off her reading glasses and stared at him a moment,
then went into the corridor and called out, "Herr Schmidt-Kersmecke!"
Jacks looked around the small room cluttered with files and books, all
in German. A large photo of a serious looking gent stared down at him
from the wall over the lady's desk: Rudolf Steiner the name under it
indicated. A few moments later she returned followed by a tall thin
elderly man with gray hair touching his shoulders, in a black suit with
a black silk flowing artist's bow-tie. Jacks glanced back at the photo
and saw the same tie on Steiner.

"Please have a seat, Herr Jacks," he said in German.

"No thanks, I'm in a hurry really, must make a phone call."

"You can use our phone if you like." Jacks hesitated. "Frau Fintelfink
and I will be glad to step outside while you're calling."

They left the room and Jacks dialled Panam. John Armstrong was the
manager of Panam and a local CIA agent The secretary told him that John
Armstrong was at a meeting.

"Get him on the phone, Bea, it's urgent."

"He's not here, it's a Board of Airline Representatives meeting."

"Ok, give me the B.A.R. number, I don't have my address book with me."

"Oh, it's not at the B.A.R."

"Where is it then?

"At the Sheraton Hotel?"

"The Sheraton? Why there?"

"Every year they have what they call a working lunch at some big hotel.
You remember, Mr. Jacks. Mr. Armstrong never comes back to the office
afterwards, so I guess they do more than work." She giggled.

"Give me the Sheraton's number, Bea," Jacks said, feeling desperate. She
took forever finding it. And it took Jacks forever to finally get
Armstrong on the line. "They took them already, John," Jacks began...

"Took who? Who took whom?"

"This phone isn't secure, damn it --"

"Well this one sure as hell isn't either."

"They took the people we're interested in, here in Florida."

"Oh, Frau Marie?"

What an idiot! "Yes, Frau Marie."

"And husband?"

"Yes. Did you do anything to avoid that?"

"Jeez, Marvin, we only talked about it an hour or so ago."

"So you didn't."

"I couldn't know it was so urgent."

"Well, it is. So please get on it now to release them."

"I'm undercover, Marv, can't do that directly just like that."

"Even to S.I.D.E.?

"Even to them."

"Your boss at the embassy then."

"He's in Washington."

Jacks took a deep, frustrated breath. "They have telephones in
Washington, John. Call him and tell him to get on it. It's easy."

"Well, he might be at important meetings there, and I --"

"This is important. You can't get information from dead people."

"Come on, Marvin, they're not gonna kill East German spies, for god's
sake."

"Maybe not...but everything but. For those guys gang rape is an
interrogation method."

"You seem inappropriately concerned, old buddy. The big man'll be back
in a few days, and... "

Jacks stopped listening. Armstrong was right. He shouldn't be so
worried, but he was. "Look, John, let's put it this way. Do it for me as
a personal favor."

"Don't tell me you got the hots for her already. Man, you're slipping."

"Not already. I knew her from before."

"Before what?"

"Never mind that."

"Whose side are you on anyway, Marvin?"

"Ours ... but just do what I ask and I'll get what you want."

"Like what?"

"Every fucking thing you ever wanted to know about the GDR East German
intelligence service. But that's not the point. I'm asking you as a
favor, John."

Silence, then: "Okay, I'll do what I can ... and you're gonna owe me
big, buddy."

He was sitting there with his head in his hands when Herr
Schmidt-Something stuck his head in the door. "Are you finished
telephoning?"

"Oh... yes, sorry."

Frau Finkelfink pushed in behind him glaring.

"How much do I owe for the calls?"

"Two local calls, eighty centavos," the dragon lady said.

"Oh," Herr S-K said, "I'm sure we can absorb that, Agnes."

"We can't absorb anything, Herbert. "

Jacks fished in his pocket and came up with a peso. "No, she's right,
here."

She took the peso and opened a drawer in her desk. She dropped the peso
in and started to hand Jacks twenty centavos change. "That's all right,"
he said generously. It was almost insulting, like offering a tip. She
dropped the twenty centavos back in the drawer without a word.

Herr S-K sat down at the table. "I know you\'re in a hurry, Herr Jacks.
At least you said you are. But I\'ve found that most people who say
they\'re in a hurry would be much better off if they weren\'t, or
didn\'t think there are." Surprised, Jacks was about to answer angrily,
but S-K didn\'t really pause. He smiled and said that Micaela\'s class
had an extra hour today because they were rehearsing for a play.
"Personally I think it\'s somewhat above their age group, but as you
probably know, in our schools the teacher is king\...or, rather, queen.
He laughed as Jacks frowned. "Actually, I didn\'t know," he said.

"Well," Herr S-K went on, Frau Clement must have forgotten to tell you,
or forgot herself. Have you known Frau Clement long, Herr Jacks?

"Yes," Jacks said, surprising himself.

"An interesting woman, don\'t you agree?"

Marvin Jacks did not tell Herr Schmit-Kersmecke everything that follows
below of course, but it did pass through his mind quickly and
pictorially as they say when you life passes through your soul directly
after death. He did give Herr S-K a radically condensed version though
in the hour they spent waiting for Micaela to join them.

### 1

### Paternostro

#### East Berlin, 1974

Judith Baumgartner and Dr. Hans Staudenmaier were huddled over a map of
West Berlin in a small basement room with no windows. A long florescent
light on the ceiling hummed like a beehive. They were preparing a list
of objectives that the Soviet Mission Military Patrol was to photograph
on its next rounds. Actually they were suggesting, the Russians would
decide. It was frustrating work for they seldom knew if their allies
would approve their suggestions. Hans Staudenmaier, a robust middle-aged
man with a goatee and rimless glasses, was doing the selecting and
dictating to Judith, who made notes in German, which she would later
translate into Russian in a stenographer\'s spiraled notebook made in
West Germany. She was young and pretty and intense; there was a certain
hardness about her which would have seemed unusual in one so young if we
did not know that they were in the building in East Berlin that housed
the STASI -- East Germany's State Security organization. It was
difficult for them to think of objectives in West Berlin that hadn't
already been photographed.

Judith looked out the rain-speckled window at a gray sky and, below, the
gray city even when the sun was shining. She considered asking the
Military Patrol to concentrate on vehicles for a few days, especially
military ones, moving or parked. Yes, that was a good idea -- but just
as she was about to ask Staudenmaier, who was the senior person in the
section, what he thought of it, a phone rang in an adjoining room and a
young man yelled from there: \"Fr√§ulein Baumgartner, it\'s for you.\"
She sighed as though annoyed, but was relieved to escape from her
Staudenmaier's halitosis for a while at least. It was the Director\'s
secretary on the phone, who told her to go directly to the Herr Direktor
Kamerad Wolff's office. The secretary waited only for her to confirm:
\"Jawohl, Frau Schmidt, aber\...\" and hung up before Judith could ask
why she was being summoned to such lofty heights. She walked quickly
back to Dr. Staudenmaier, \"I have to go upstairs, Herr Doktor. Sorry,
I\'ll be back as soon as I can.\"

\"Anything the matter?\" he asked, noticing her nervousness, but also
curious.

\"No.\" If she said that the Director wanted to see her it would be all
over the office in a matter of seconds. She hurried off to the
\"paternostro\", the ancient but reliable dumbwaiter-like elevator, and
stepped in like the experienced passenger she was. The paternostro fit
only one, so she could wonder in private what the Director, Herr Dr.
Wolff, could possibly want with her. She hadn\'t done anything wrong
that she was aware of, but she knew that in the STASI one was not always
necessarily aware of one\'s own wrongdoing. The paternostro was slow,
for safety reasons, but it arrived on the fourth floor too soon for her.
She wished she wasn\'t wearing those ugly, but warm, woollen stockings.
She knocked on the Director\'s door and heard Frau Schmidt\'s hoarse
cigarette voice calling her to enter.

\"Fr√§ulein Baumgartner?\"

\"Yes.\"

Frau Schmidt, dumpy and fiftyish, rose and opened the Director\'s door
behind her. \"Fr√§ulein Baumgartner,\" she announced. Instead of telling
Judith to wait, she stood aside as the Director himself came out smiling
and took Judith\'s hand. She thought for a moment that he might kiss it.
He was a tall, moderately ugly, middle-aged man with crows-feet behind
his eyes from smiling. He wore a double-breasted suit, obviously western
made, and was as elegant as any capitalist banker.

\"I\'m very pleased to meet you, Fr√§ulein Baumgartner,\" he said, in a
surprisingly high voice. \"Won\'t you come in?" Why should he be pleased
to meet her? Judith thought. Well, at least he didn\'t sound as though
he was about to fire her. The office was as elegant as he was, and warm.
Ah, a fireplace -- and burning wood instead of coal. He invited her to
sit.

\"Coffee or tea?\" he asked. She chose coffee. \"Bring us two coffees,
please, Frau Schmidt,\" Wolff ordered as he closed the door.

\"Now,\" he said sitting behind his desk across from her, still
smiling,\" you must be wondering why I sent for you.\"

\"Ja, Herr Kamerad Direktor, I was wondering that.\"

He looked at her for a few moments before going on, studying her pale
face, untidy hair and proletarian clothing with approval. \"I knew your
father,\" he finally said.

She nodded.

\"I was a student of his before\...actually even when the Gestapo
arrested him.\"

\"In Leipzig?\" It was a stupid question, because it must have been
Leipzig, but she felt she had to say something.

\"Yes. He was a brilliant man and a dedicated Communist.\"

\"I know,\" Judith, agreed, \"and a good man.\"

\"And that combination -- good, a Communist and a Jew to boot, was what
doomed him.\" Judith didn\'t know if he was being cynical or simply
stating an obvious fact. He certainly didn\'t sound sympathetic. She
wondered what had saved Wolff from the same fate. Perhaps he had been
none of those things her father was.

\"I had no reputation and wasn\'t a Jew,\" Wolff said, as though
divining her thoughts. \"So I was drafted, but deserted to the
Russians.\" He smiled. \"It\'s an interesting story, but I won\'t go
into it now.\" Did he intend to go into it later she wondered as Frau
Schmidt entered carrying a tray with the coffee things. She poured while
they sat in silence. Judith knew from the aroma that the coffee was
real.

When his secretary had left, Wolff said, \"I\'ll come right to the
point, Fra√ºlein\...May I call you Judith? As your father\'s friend and
the difference in our ages, it doesn\'t seem incorrect.\" Judith *Sie*
or *Du*? No, that would be too much. \"Of course, Kamerad Direktor,\"
she said.

\"Good, thank you,\" he smiled. \"How long have you been with us,
Judith?\"

He must know that, she thought. \"A little over a year,\" she answered.

\"Already a year? And I know from the records that you did very well in
training and have been doing well in your work as well.\"

\"Thank you.\"

He nodded. "Cigarette?\" He opened a box on his desk. She was about to
reach for one, but when she saw that they were Russian *papirosi*, she
declined. Wolff laughed. "They *are* awful, aren't they. I only use
them to test a person's taste." He reached into his jacket pocket and
took out a pack of Marlboros. He offered her one, which she, despite a
fleeting notion that it could be a trap, accepted.

"How did you escape from the Nazis, if you don't mind my asking?"

"Not at all. I was sent to the country, to some friends of my fathers."

"I see. Gentile friends?

"Yes."

"And did you change your name -- outwardly, that is?"

"I used their family name, and they called me Rotraud."

He smiled, widely this time. "Wunderbar! But frankly I prefer Judith. I
believe she was a very strong Biblical personality."

"Yes, she was. She defeated Israel's enemies."

"Did they treat you well, that family I mean, not Israel's enemies?"

Despite his moderate ugliness and his exalted position, Judith found him
quite charming. "Yes, very well, and I will always be grateful to them"

"Of course you will."

Wolff looked down at his desk for a moment or so, as though deciding
something. "You know, of course, that we have people in the west,\" he
said after lighting his own, then her Marlboro, with a hammer and sickle
embossed zippo.

She nodded.

\"And, as you can imagine, we don\'t send just anyone there.\" He paused
as though expecting a reply.

\"Of course not,\" Judith said.

\"There are many temptations there -- if one isn\'t a good socialist.\"

She decided not to say yes and of course to everything he said, so she
waited. \"Are you a good socialist, Judith?\"

\"You know that I am, Kamerad Direktor.\"

The smile was gone now. \"How should I know that? Socialism isn\'t
necessarily inherited, you know."

\"In my case it is,\" Judith answered. \"I loved my father very much and
admired his ideals.\"

Wolff raised his eyebrows: \"Admired?\"

\"I loved them,\" she clarified.

\"You are speaking in the past tense, Judith.\"

\"I mean when he was alive. I still do and I am a committed Socialist,
Kamerad Direktor,\" she answered, returning his gaze.

\"I believe you are, Judith,\" he said. \"Do you take sugar?\"

\"No, thank you.\"

"Well, then, please.\" He picked up his cup and sipped. She followed
suit, glad that her hand wasn\'t shaking. And why should it be? They
understood each other and she knew she had passed the test, for whatever
purpose it may have been posed.

\"Are you really fluent in English?\" he asked in English. \"Forgive my
asking, but I\'ve found that fluency is relative where many of our
people are concerned.\"

\"I don\'t think I am,\" she replied in English

He frowned. \"Explain, please.\"

\"My English is from studying. I have had little practical experience in
the language.\"

\"But it sounds very good to me.\" He reverted to German. \"I didn\'t
expect you to sound like a native speaker.\"

"Well, I do have an accent."

"Who doesn't? Why did you study it?"

Judith thought for a moment. "A good question; not for practical
reasons, I fear. It's just so beautiful."

"I see, and which authors do you prefer?"

A loaded question? But she was prepared: "I like Jack London, but
Steinbeck is a better writer."

"Ah -- *Of Mice and Men*?"

She smiled for the first time. "Oh yes, and so real, I mean the social
conditions he described."

"Hmm, well, one reason is as good as another. And I see from your
records that your Russian is fluent" he said in Russian.

"It is," she answered in the same language. "I had Russian teachers in
school."

He may have been thinking of asking which Russian writers she preferred,
but if so, decided not to. "I have a job for you, Judith,\" Wolff said.
He put three heaping spoonfuls of sugar in his cup and drank it down in
one gulp.

\"In the west, Herr Direktor?\" she asked.

\"Yes, my dear, in the west.\" He went to his desk and pushed a button.

\"Ja, Herr Direktor?\" Frau Schmidt answered.

\"Is Herr Cornelius there?\"

\"Ja, Herr Direktor\"

\"Send him in, please.\" He stood facing the door, which opened
immediately and a young, tall, well-dressed man entered in an army
lieutenant\'s uniform. He was handsome, too handsome to trust, Judith
thought. He stood ramrod straight before Wolff: "*Guten Morgen, Kamerad
Direktor Wolff*". Wolff smiled and held out his hand. The other took it,
but did not return the smile.

"Now I must introduce you, Stasi style", Wolff said ironically. "Frau
Cornelius, meet Lt. Cornelius." Both young people stared at Wolff,
speechless. He had expected that reaction, and played his histrionic
hand to the hilt. "I must apologize for springing this on you so
formally, especially since you, Frau Cornelius, have never heard your
new name before. But please, let's relax and sit here." He indicated a
couch and easy chairs in the corner of his office. They both hurried to
occupy single chairs. "Would you like another cup of coffee, Frau
Cornelius?" Judith nodded and Wolff pressed the intercom button on his
desk and told Frau Schmidt to bring three more coffees. "And please
don't be so stingy with the sugar, Frau Schmidt." He then sat on the
couch, crossed his legs, spread his arms over the back of the couch and
smiled at them.

When the coffee appeared, almost immediately, and Frau Schmidt had left
the room, Wolff became serious. "Here's what we plan for you," he said.
"You will receive the necessary training in spycraft and, much easier,
the travel agency business. This will take about three months. Then a
few weeks in Moscow, theoretically for more training, but in reality for
indoctrination and their blessing. How\'s your Russian, by the way?" he
asked, looking at the young man.

"*Gut*, but could be better," the new husband said.

"It will be." Wolf observed them as he offered the real cigarettes,
which they accepted, the lieutenant with trembling fingers.

"When you return from Moscow where, according to your story, you met and
fell in love, you will get married. Everyone, your families, friends,
enemies in case you have any, must be convinced of all this. So you will
look happy, whether you are or not. I sincerely hope that you are, for
it would be easier for all concerned, especially you.

"Once you are deemed ready", he continued, "you will defect to West
Berlin and report to an American military post. This is a logical step
for one of our army officers. You always feel more at home with your
peers. Isn't that true, lieutenant?" He didn't wait for an answer. "We
don't want you in the hands of West German intelligence or the CIA.
American Military Intelligence is stupid and amateurish, which ours is
also, by the way; that's why we don't let them handle anything of
importance. But the Americans are worse, their various intelligence
services compete with each other and very often one doesn't know what
the others are doing or what they know. Army intelligence is the worst,
mostly because they rotate officers and enlisted men in and out, so that
once they have gained sufficient experience to almost know what they're
doing, they're gone. There are individual exceptions to this, but they
are few and far between and only handle important items and people. You
will not be deemed important enough." He drank his coffee slowly but
completely and looked at them. "Are you following me so far?"

Both nodded, somewhat hesitantly.

"Good. They will interrogate you, but courteously. You will be treated
as guests, VIPs even, most probably at their interrogation center, Camp
King, in Oberursel, just outside Frankfurt. You will be cooperative, as
behooves defectors seeking a new life in the consumer society."

"What should I tell them, Kamerad Direktor?" Cornelius said.

"Everything. Unless you know some deep dark secrets about us, you won't
be able to tell them anything they don't already know. They will want to
know about Order of Battle of course, but especially morale. They will
question you about our army's morale. You will tell the truth." Wolff
looked at Cornelius, waiting for his reaction, which gave the latter the
courage to give it.

"Morale isn't really very good, Herr Direktor."

"You don't say," Wolff said, unsurprised. "That's what you will tell
them then. They already know it anyway. You must tell the truth about
such things so you will not be under suspicion. Understood?"

"Jawohl!"

"Good. Now you, Mrs. Cornelius, they will interrogate you as well, but
not with much interest. You have only to confirm your husband's account
and tell them about life in East Germany in general, the truth. We have
invented an employment for you, in the travel department of the foreign
ministry, which will provide a rationale for taking up the same
profession in Argentina."

"Argentina?"

"Yes, your penultimate destination. But we'll go into that tomorrow. I
have an appointment with the Kamerad Chairman now, and don't want to
keep him waiting for more than is his due." He stood up. The others
followed suit. "Until tomorrow, then, at nine o'clock here."

"In the morning?" Cornelius asked.

"In the evening," Wolff replied. "You may go now. I suggest you get to
know each other." He pressed the intercom button and told Frau Schmidt
to call the Chairman's office and advise that he was on his way. He
stopped halfway to the door. "By the way, I almost forgot." He grinned.
"This is all voluntary of course. I\'m afraid I assumed that you would
both agree. So please think it over and let me know what you decide
tomorrow. And\...this meeting was secret, top secret in fact, so you are
not to mention it to anyone.

As they approached the elevator the lieutenant said to Judith, "The
paternostro only holds one at a time, not a good way to get to know each
other. So perhaps we could have a drink somewhere, or\..."

"We should decide first," Judith interrupted him. She felt herself
blush. "I mean\...you know\..."

Yes, of course, I just thought\..." He held his hand out with a slight
bow. She shook it and jumped into a paternostro box as it passed. She
saw his pressed trousers and gleaming black shoes as she descended. "The
next time I see him I will be dressed appropriately," she thought as she
glanced down at her woolen stockings.

Back at her desk she ignored the papers and stared into the distance,
her heart pounding.

"Is something wrong, Judith?" Staudenmaier asked her.

"What?\...Oh no, it\'s just that\...that I must leave early today. Is
that all right, Dr. Staudenmaier?"

Staudenmaier had asked her several times to call him Hans, but she could
never bring herself to do it. He liked to think of himself as fatherly,
or at least avuncular, but actually, despite the thirty years difference
in their ages, he was quite in love with her. "Yes, of course, but\..."
She had already picked up her purse and was heading back to the
paternostro before he could finish the sentence.

### 2

### Basic Training

#### Camp Breckinridge, Kentucky, 1974

Not that we were going anywhere or there was any reason for the march,
except that it was in the training schedule: ten-mile night march with
weapons and full field pack. That was during one of the hardest parts of
the Vietnam war when we were getting the shit kicked out of us by the
Vietcong. That meant that there were very few noncoms and officers
around to train new guys like us. In fact, we only had the Company
Commander, Captain Nugent, who was an Enlisted Man at heart, but
couldn't help it if they gave him a battlefield commission for being a
hero in Vietnam. He was full of shrapnel and stuff, which must have hurt
a lot, so he consumed quite a bit of whiskey -- you know, to ease the
pain. Then there was First Sergeant Quinn, also a battle-scarred
veteran. He ran the company, but I guess First Sergeants run most
companies. The Field First Sergeant -- the one who did the actual
training -- was Silas Taylor, a wiry little guy from Georgia who had
spent a lot of time in Vietnam, was wounded a few times, and even had a
Silver Star. I was surprised -- we all were -- when I learned that he
was only twenty-one years old, because he had eyes that looked a lot
older.

There were no more noncoms, except for the mess sergeant, who doesn\'t
count because that\'s another world, so on the first day First Sgt.
Quinn asked if anyone had military experience. No one had, but one guy
was a cop in civilian life so they made him Acting Platoon Leader.
Another guy was a lifeguard at Jones Beach, so they made him one too.
And so on. I thought of mentioning that I had been a Boy Scout, but
decided not to. They might have made me Acting Company Commander.

One day during the first week, Field First Sgt. Taylor ran us up a hill.
He went first and got there about a hundred yards before the first
trainee. We straggled up puffing and groaning and Sgt. Taylor waited
until the last one arrived before he began his speech, which went
something like this. "Ah said *run* up this here hill and you pussies
didn't run, you *crawled*." He didn't shout, just talked loud enough in
his southern accent for all of us to hear. Some of us had never even
heard a southern accent before, except in the movies. "Now, if y'all
keep doin\' things that I tell y'all to do like that, I mean crawlin\'
instead a runnin\', your gonna be fuckin *me*, cause ahm supposed to get
this here company in shape to go over and fight the enemy. That means
*you-all*. In shape! Now ah don't like to be fucked, and if y'all fuck
me, I'm gonna fuck *you-all*. And you can bet your sweet asses that I
can fuck y'all better than y'all can fuck me. On the other hand, if
y'all do what ah says, and do it *like* ah says, y'all will not have any
problems in this here company. Is-that-understood?" Silence. "Answer me,
goddammittafuckinhell!" He did shout the last word, if you can call it a
word. "Yes, Sergeant," someone mumbled. "Louder! *All* a yuh!" He made
us say it louder about five times until we were screaming. "OK, now
we're goin' down the hill and we're *runnin. *If any of you city
slickers don't know what runnin means, I'm telling ya. It means moving
*fast.*"

Sgt. Silas Taylor had won our respect, and he was as good as his word. A
couple of wise guys who thought they could get away with goofing off
found themselves on a week of KP; one guy even got sent back to a new
company and had to start basic all over again. And when we did things
right we sometimes got off some shit details or got weekend passes.

The first problem with that night march was that Freddy Polanski, the
medic, had the flu and couldn't go. Some thought that Freddy had some
medical school, because he was pretty good, but I think he just took the
three-day first-aid course they give for medics because it was better
than the rifle range or some such shit. It wasn't like in the movies,
where the medics can practically perform a heart transplant on the
battlefield. The second problem was 2^nd^ Lieutenant Scumbag. I forget
his real name, but that's what we called him. He simply appeared one day
standing alongside Sgt. Taylor when we were in formation. Sgt. Taylor
said this is Lt. Scumbag (he used his real name, naturally) and he'll be
with us from now on. End of introduction.

"Who wants to be medic until Pvt. Polanski is back on his feet?" Sgt.
Taylor asked. We had been in training for two months of the four month
course and had already learned the basic army rule: *never volunteer for
anything*. But I wasn't sure that was always a good rule to live by.
Look at Sy Abrams. On the first day they asked if anyone knew how to
type. Sy raised his hand and they made him Acting Company Clerk -- no
lying in the mud at the rifle range, no night marches, no KP. It was
from Sy, by the way, that we learned about the argument between Sgt.
Taylor and Lt. Scumbag. But I'll get to that later.

I raised my hand, volunteering to be medic. Sgt. Taylor was glad that he
didn't have to ask if someone had medical experience and when no one
answered just appoint somebody. "OK, Jacks," he said, "Go get Polanski's
gear."

Every company has a medic and in combat he doesn't carry his full field
equipment, only his first-aid kit and a light carbine rifle instead of
the heavy M1. That's so he can run unimpeded to the wounded. His other
stuff goes in the truck with the officers' things. As training is
supposed to be as realistic as possible, our medic went lightly loaded
too. That's why I volunteered. Boy, did I think I was smart!

I'll tell you about the argument now. Just before the march Lt. Scumbag,
Field First Sgt Taylor and First Sgt. Quinn were getting some paper work
done in the First Sgt.'s office (actually all they were doing was
signing; Sy did all the work) when Lt. Scumbag asked Sgt Taylor if he
was going to carry his field pack or put it in the truck. "We ain't got
no truck for this march," Sgt. Taylor said. "No truck, no pack."

"Well, Sergeant, I believe in doing everything the men have to do, so
we'll be carrying packs, too."

Sgts. Taylor and Quinn looked at him like he was out of his mind.

"I'm sure that Captain Nugent would agree with me," Scumbag added,
sensing the coming opposition.

First Sgt. Quinn just laughed and handed a paper to Sy to retype because
he didn't like the margins. Sgt. Taylor got red in the face though,
especially his eagle-shaped nose, which was a sure sign that he was
furious.

"Maybe that's what they teach you college kids in ROTC, but in this here
Company A, 101^st^ Airborne Division, we do it *our* way --
Loo-ten-int."

Now, sergeants are supposed to obey lieutenants and be respectful, but
Sgt. Taylor had just spoken with such dripping scorn in his voice that
Lt. Scumbag was...well...nonplussed, to say the least. He knew that the
sergeant was a Silver Star holder with two combat tours while he,
Scumbag, was, militarily speaking, *nada*. But he didn't know that last
part yet. What if he ordered Taylor to carry his pack and Taylor told
him to fuck off? He couldn't take that chance, so he said *he* would
carry his pack and the sergeant could do as he pleased.

"Durned right," Sgt. Taylor agreed. "Anything else, Jack?" he asked
Quinn.

"Yeah, how about submitting an application for OCS (Officers Candidate
School)?"

Sgt. Taylor didn't miss a beat: "Sure, have Abrams type it up and wipe
some general's ass with it." He turned and left quick time while Quinn
roared laughing, Sy smirked and Lt. Scumbag looked like a turnip.

*Left..left..left my wife and forty-nine kids in a starving condition
without any gingerbread, thought I did right..right.*. and so on. That's
one of the songs we sang while marching through the camp streets.
Another one was *Avanti Populi*, which John Friccero taught us. It was
in Italian, so no one except him understood the words. It was only much
later, when John and I were in Military Intelligence in Germany and they
kicked him out because of his pinko background in college, that I
learned it was from the *Communist Internationale*. John said he wasn't
really a communist, just sang the song to show how ignorant the army
was. He was a college professor, for God's sake. When they kicked him
out of M.I. he got a job in Public Information, so he was better off.
The whole company sang, shouted rather, *Avanti Populi* and John sang
the rest of the text in his beautiful tenor. We only had to know when to
come in again with *Avanti Populi*.

The soldiers from the other companies always came out to watch us march
by. We were the coolest company in the regiment, no doubt about it. We
also had a real drummer, a black guy whose first name was J.B. They
tried to get him to give his real name, but he insisted that was his
real name, he had no other, even had a birth certificate to prove it.
Most of the other companies' drummers just banged on the drum to the
marching beat, but J.B. was a jazz drummer and he made marching a
pleasure. We skipped, hopped and dragged. Lt. Scumbag was horrified, but
Sgt. Taylor, though he didn't skip or hop, tolerated it looking straight
ahead with a small smile. We knew he liked it, although he sure as hell
didn't know what *Avanti Populi* meant.

We marched out of the camp onto a country road. It was a cold clear
night and the sky with the stars pinned to it was so low that you felt
you could touch it. Sgt. Taylor gave the "walk easy" command. I was
alone at the tail end of the four-abreast column walking lightly without
a pack and convinced that volunteering was a good idea---sometimes.
After a few miles the road narrowed just as the moon came up, giving us
the light we would need. Sgt. Silas Taylor had it all figured out, of
course. He knew the moon would arrive just when we needed it. He was in
the middle and to the left of the column, where he belonged, and Lt.
Scumbag bounced along at its head. We compressed ourselves into two
columns twice as long from head to ass-end, that is, me.

The road got rougher as we went, but we had already marched it during
the day, so we expected that. At about halfway, five miles, the column
suddenly stopped and I, night dreaming, bumped into the guy in front of
me. A couple of minutes later I heard the cry: MEDIC! Shit, that's me. I
ran up along the column to where Lt. Scumbag was waving his arms at me.
He, Sgt. Taylor and a group of grunts were huddled around someone
sitting on the ground. When they opened up for me to pass, I saw it was
Fat Boy, his name* *was George something. Apparently he'd stepped on a
rock while going downhill and was holding his ankle and grimacing.

"This man is injured, Medic," Lt. Scumbag said, as though I couldn't see
that for myself.

I knelt down alongside him and asked what happened. "My fuckin ankle,
hurts like hell," he whined. Sgt. Taylor knelt beside me and whispered,
"Take off his boot."

"Want me to give him a shot of morphine first?" I asked.

"This ain't the movies*, *Jacks. You ain't got no morphine anyway. Just
take off his boot and act like you know what you're doing."

"Lay down, Fat Boy. I'm going to take off your boot and see what you
got."

"Put a blanket under him first," the sergeant said.

I unlaced his boot and pulled it off as gently as I could. You'd think I
was amputating the way he squealed. The ankle was red and swollen. I
looked in my first-aid kit for the first time and found an elastic
bandage. I took it out and looked at Sgt. Taylor, who nodded. So I
wrapped it tightly around Fat Boy's ankle.

"Take the extra socks out of his pack and put them on him," Sgt. Taylor
said to someone. "And wrap him in another blanket."

"Yes, and use a blanket and two rifles to make a stretcher," Lt. Scumbag
interjected. "We can carry him that way."

Sgt. Taylor ignored him. "Popeye!" he yelled down the line.

"Yo," came the answer.

"Get yuh ass over here."

Popeye was a skinny little runt, but the only one in the company who
could run faster and farther than Sgt. Taylor, if he was motivated, such
as by a direct order.

"Run," Taylor told him. "And ah mean run back to camp, to the hospital,
and tell them to send a ambulance here. Tell them it's serious, a man
down, or they'll finish their hand of poker before deciding to leave.
You come with them so the dumb bastards don't get lost. Got it?"

"Got it, Sarge." And he took off like Road Runner.

The ambulance arrived in record time. I half expected to see Popeye
running along in front of it, leading the way, but he was sleeping on
the patient's cot in the back.

"Hell, lieutenant," the young doctor said to Scumbag, "I expected to
find a comatose patient, the way your runner described it. This man
looks like he sprained his ankle."

"We thought it might be broken, Sir." The doc didn't have any rank on
his whites, but Scumbag figured anyone must outrank him. "Of course the
runner, the messenger, is prone to exaggeration, but then sometimes it's
better to exaggerate than to ignore a possible serious casualty..." He
would have gone on philosophizing, but the doc turned his back and told
his driver to supervise getting Fat Boy into the ambulance. That's when
they found Popeye, and unceremoniously tossed him out of the ambulance.

We finished the march and had the next day off. Fat Boy came out of the
hospital with a cast on his ankle and crutches. No break but some
ligaments were torn. Company A won the regimental award for best company
the whole four months we were there. They wanted to promote Captain
Nugent to major, but he said no, then he'd have to go to regiment and he
thought his work as Company Commander was more important at this time of
crisis for our country, so they left him alone. Lt. Scumbag complained
to Captain Nugent about Sgt. Taylor, said he was insubordinate. Captain
Nugent just glared at him and said, "Get the fuck out of my sight,
Scumbag." He'd heard about the nickname from Sgt. Quinn. Lt. Scumbag
applied for a transfer and left a week or two later. You know to where?
The Pentagon in Washington, as assistant to some policy maker. No wonder
the army's all fucked up.

Sgts. Taylor and Quinn and Capr. Nugent stayed at Company A to whip
the next batch of trainees into shape. They decided that Sy Abrams was
more valuable to the war effort as Company Clerk of A Company, so they
made him a Corporal and he stayed, too. I don't know how long Sgt.
Taylor stayed. He wanted to go back to Nam. Crazy bastard, but the best
soldier I ever saw. Polanski was out of bed in three days and took over
the medic duties again. I'd only had one patient, and Fat Boy gave me
the honor of being the first to sign his cast.

### 3

### Goodbye Vietnam

#### Camp Breckenridge, Kentucky, 1974

I remember the day well, because it was just after we got back from that
night march. At reveille, the First Sergeant called out my name and when
I raised my hand he told me to report to him at Company HQ after chow.
Because of all that marching and other strenuous stuff, we were always
famished at breakfast, knowing that another similar day stood before us.
So despite being nervous, and the other guys asking me what I had done
to be called to the First Sgt's fearful presence, I shoveled it down as
usual. Between mouthfuls I told them I had no idea, which was true.

AT HQ he told me that I had been ordered to report to Division
Classification and Assignment at 9 a.m. When I asked why, he shook his
head and said, "Don't know, son." I was surprised at such a benevolent
expression from a tough looking guy with all those stripes and medals,
not to mention a pot belly. Frankly, it worried me.

"Just go," he said. "Do you know where it is?"

"Never heard of it, Sergeant."

He told me how to get there, that I could walk it in fifteen minutes,
and dismissed me with a wave of an index finger. The rest of the company
had already left for the firing range and I had a couple of hours to
kill. I didn't hit the sack because I was afraid I wouldn't wake up in
time, so I took a paperback from my footlocker -- James Jones' *From
Here to Eternity --* and walked to the C&A building, then around it,
then to the PX for a cup of coffee and some leisurely reading.

"Youse guys have been called here because of those IQ tests you thought
were dumb that you took when you entered this man's army seemed to show
that you have an aptitude for foreign languages," a sergeant told us
with what smelled of a sneer, like he couldn't believe it. We were only
fourteen grunts from the whole division.

"Now pay attention, cause I ain't gonna repeat it, and I only speak one
language and that\'s army American."

Suddenly his tone and his army American changed. "According to those
tests you are all qualified to attend the Army Language School in
Monterey, California in order to learn one of the foreign languages the
army needs or may need." He waited for that to sink in; obviously he\'d
done this before. "It\'s voluntary and there\'s a catch\...isn\'t there
always?" We nodded, at least I did.

"If you decide to attend the school, and are accepted, you have to re-up
-- reenlist in the queen\'s English -- for three years upon completing
basic training. Is that clear?"

We were all adding up the time: after four months of basic training,
another three years instead of the remaining twenty months. But we knew
that we were in the pipeline to Vietnam where the war was going on and
who in his right mind would prefer dodging bullets to a vacation in
California? Heroes, which we weren\'t. No one said anything. It was
clear.

He handed out applications. After filling in the usual data, we were to
select our first choice of languages to be studied. They were:

Swedish

Russian

Vietnamese

Chinese

Being in one\'s right mind would seem to indicate that Swedish was the
rational choice. Imagine spending the rest of the time after the
Language School in Stockholm surrounded by beautiful Swedish broads!
Vietnamese or Chinese would be for those not in their right minds. And
me? I was in the midst of a Dostoevsky binge and dreamed of reading *The
Brothers Karamazov* in the original, so on impulse I checked Russian,
fearing that I would live to regret it.

Two weeks later we were called back to C&A. The sergeant was in a better
mood. He even smiled; so did we, at first. "Bad news I\'m afraid," he
said. "The Swedish quota had been filled by the time your applications
were received, so all your applications were rejected, except\..." he
looked down at the file on his desk\... "Pvt. Marvin Jacks, who chose
Russian. "Are you here, Jacks?" I raised my hand. "Answer like a fucking
soldier!" he said with feigned anger, still smiling. "Yes, sergeant."

"But there\'s no need for the rest of you to despair. Vietnamese and
Chinese are still open, so you can reapply." His eyes scanned the room.
No reaction. "There\'s no time to consult your mothers, gentlemen, so
decide right now. If you don\'t like those beautiful oriental languages
you can leave now." After a pause, two guys stood up and left,
grumbling. The rest chose Chinese. I was in a kind of mini-shock. What
did I ever do to deserve this? I asked myself. Going to sunny California
to learn Russian instead of dodging gook bullets in a Vietnam with
winter approaching. Nothing, I decided, but it is what it is.

After basic training was over half the company was sent to Vietnam, the
other half to Germany. The army decided that alphabetically: names
beginning A to M to Vietnam; N to* Z *to Germany. Very scientific*. *I,
however, was on my way to the Army Language School in Monterey,
California, to study Russian for a year. That last day the whole company
stood in front of the barracks in dress uniforms. First Sergeant Quinn
called each man by name and handed him his orders. Then shook his hand.
Field First Sergeant Silas Taylor stood next to him and shook all hands
as well. The Company Commander stood a few paces behind them watching --
which was correct, because he didn\'t really know us. I could almost
swear I saw a tear in the First Sergeant\'s eye as he said "Good luck,
son," to each one of us.

My father drove me to the airport in New York. My duffel bag didn\'t fit
into the trunk, so we left the trunk-lid open with the bag half out.
When we got to the airport the bag wasn\'t there; it\'d either bounced
out or was stolen when we stopped for a red light. My father said he'd
look for it on the way home, but it was never found. So I arrived at the
Language School with only the clothes on my back. I gradually bought the
uniform stuff from quartermaster, but I didn\'t complain. It was better
than Vietnam.

### 4

### –û–±—É—á–µ–Ω–∏–µ \[Training\]

#### Moscow, 1974

Judith Baumgartner and her future husband sat with a small group of
trainees from various countries waiting to hear an introductory lecture
at the Moscow Center facility. The room was spare and the chairs
uncomfortable. Two men entered from the rear and took their places at a
lectern. One was stocky and ferocious looking in a bulky Russian suit.
The other wore a slight smile and his suit, although also of Russian
make, looked as though it had been cut to fit.

"*Dobrie Dyen tovarishie*," the bulky one said. "Good morning,
comrades," the other interpreted. And so it went, the Russian speaking
first and the other interpreting with a posh British pronunciation.
Judith, who understood both languages, noted that the interpretation was
far from literal. Although the content was basically the same, the style
was different, easier, with a few wry jokes thrown in, at which the
other Russian, obviously not understanding, frowned as the audience
grinned, not daring to be more demonstrative.

"You are here, comrades, in order to learn how you can best serve our
Marxist-Leninist revolution. As you know, we strive to serve the working
classes the world over. We are fighting for justice and equality.
Although we have been successful here in the Soviet Union thanks to our
courageous leaders, and in several other countries in Eastern Europe and
Africa and Central and South America, there is still much to accomplish.
You have been selected by the parties in your countries as loyal,
*trustworthy* socialists. I emphasize the word "trustworthy" because
trust is the most important characteristic of our work: we must trust
you and you must trust us! He paused and glared at his audience. Then he
almost smiled. "I now leave you at the mercy of Comrade Kuznitsov. Good
luck."

"That\'s me", Kuznitsov said after the bad cop had marched out. "And I
*am* merciful." His smiled seemed genuine, so one could almost feel the
group's silent sigh of relief. Judith would eventually learn that there
were no such things as mercy and mutual trust in the KGB, especially
when Germans were concerned. She already knew about the lack of trust in
the STASI, especially when Russians were concerned. "Your training will
consist of the following..." Several trainees took out notebooks. "No
notes, please." The notebooks disappeared. "After breakfast, which is
very good by the way, you are privileged to hear an indoctrination
lecture. The second hour will be a course in Russian for those who do
not speak it and also for those who do, who are expected to help those
who do not. Also, certain technical aspects, such as interrogation
techniques are included, which you may not be familiar with. I must warn
you now, comrades, that failure or dropping out are not options. You
already know too much for that. Even this introductory meeting is top
secret."

"We, the KBG, are the world's most effective information-gathering
organization. We operate -- sometimes legally, sometimes illegally -- in
target countries where a resident -- a cultural or military attach√© for
example -- is in charge of this espionage activity. If caught -- yes, it
happens sometimes -- he is protected by diplomatic immunity. He will
then return to his own country, either voluntarily or, if declared
*persona non grata...*well, he will return anyway, expelled by the
target country. We then expel one of their "diplomats", with or without
evidence. Is that fair? You may ask. Yes, because they do the same.

Now we come to the illegal comrades, those without diplomatic immunity.
We have studied your files and know that most of you will be in that
category. They may be prosecuted and imprisoned. Often, however, we are
able to trade spies with them. If you are careful, you will not be
caught."

He didn't mention those who are careful and are caught anyway because of
a mole or a defector who reveals their identity. Judith knew of such a
case.

"All of what I am saying also applies to your home countries, which also
have diplomatic missions. The KGB and your own agencies share all the
information gathered." Judith also knew that the sharing was one-sided;
the KGB gets everything and the others get crumbs.

"We value the unofficial operatives more, because they are able to
infiltrate more easily, whereas diplomatic personnel are suspected
anyway and are followed everywhere." He glanced around the room. "Your
files indicate that you all know English. I hope it's true, because this
training will be in that decadent, but useful language." He smiled as
though he'd just told a joke. Judith was not amused. "But I can assure
you that once we have won the battle that will no longer be the case.
Russian will then be the international language." No smile.

"There are several basic forms of espionage: political, economic,
military-strategic, counter-intelligence and scientific-technical. We
classify our spies, if I may use that loaded word, as *agents*
(intelligence providers) and *controllers *(intelligence relayers). The
agents have a legend, that is, a false identity. This legend is
substantiated by living in a foreign country, which may or may not be
the real target country, to which they will eventual immigrate with an
apparently true biography. Any questions?" A young black man raised his
hand. "Yes?"

"Why not go directly to the target country?" he asked in heavily
accented English.

"That's a possibility, depending on your biography," Kuznitsov replied.
"If the target country is the United States, for example, would you be
able to obtain a permanent visa?"

"No likely," the young man said. "I communist."

"Exactly. So you must first establish a bourgeois identity in a second
country, from which you might be acceptable to the Americans. We'll go
into more detail about how this works later. We will also tell you about
methods of intelligence gathering, also known as spycraft, which
includes stealing or photographing documents, code-names, contacts,
targets, dead-letter boxes, etc. "


### 5

### The First Encounter

#### Monterey, California

That night I went to the Gilded Cage with a purpose and was dressed
accordingly: blue sports jacket, slacks, loafers without socks, white
shirt open to the third button. I arrived early and found a stool at the
semi-circular bar, put a fiver on the bar for effect, ordered a Millers
High Life, lit a cigarette, and looked around. The bar-stools were
almost all occupied -- by men. Soon they\'d be three deep, it being
Friday night. The piano was set back in an alcove to the left-rear of
the bar. It also had bar-stools around it so you could drink there and
look at the player with one elbow on the piano. Two young couples were
perched on the stools, the men in suits and ties and the giggly women
showing a lot of leg. The men were probably asshole officers from Fort
Ord, I figured. The piano player was playing *As Time Goes By*, probably
requested by one of the girls. That kind of girl always requested that
kind of song because they liked to think of themselves as Ingrid
Bergman - romantic and teary - without realizing that it wasn\'t a song
you could request, it had to hit you out of the blue. I lit another
cigarette and nursed my beer.\
The Gilded Cage wasn\'t really my kind of place, primarily because they
only served bottled beer which cost two bits, except for Miller\'s High
Life, which went for thirty cents. Hell, you could get a good glass of
draft anywhere else for a dime. There were other things I didn\'t like
about it, such as the yellow birdcage hanging over the bar with a live
parakeet in it and the bartender wearing a tie and garters on his
sleeves. I wondered what it felt like to be a caged bird in that dump.
The whole place was like a trinket you could buy in the five-and-ten.
And the customers -- ¬†mostly what you'd call gay today but what we
called something else then -- thought they were hot shit with their
sports jackets and ties and wavy hair and loud laughs. About the only
thing good about the Gilded Cage was the piano player, who could play
anything you asked for. You had to tip him or buy him a drink every time
you made a request though, so I never requested anything because I was
only a private in the United States Army and my budget didn\'t include
tips, except to waitresses. In fact, I'd only been in the Gilded Cage
once before, on a payday, when I wandered in drunk without knowing what
kind of place it was. Monterey was full of cheap bars and the only
reason to go to an expensive one would be on the chance of picking up a
girl, which was damn hard in a town that had the Army Language School
right up the hill in the Presidium and Fort Ord about five miles away.
Monterey wasn\'t Steinbeck\'s Cannery Row anymore, and it hadn\'t yet
become a snooty extension of Carmel and Pacific Grove. It wasn\'t much
of anything, as far as I was concerned.\
\"Nice song,\" a guy said who sidled up next to me.I nodded and looked
at him in the mirror. In his thirties, I guessed, suntanned, casually
well dressed. He was smiling at my profile. \"And from a nice picture,\"
I agreed.\
\"Saw it three times myself,\" the guy said. \"You?\"

\"About the same.\"\
\"You want your drink here, Jacky?\" the bartender asked the guy.\
\"Yes, thank you, Sal.\"\
The bartender went to the end of the bar and came back with a glass with
an inch of whiskey and soda in it. He put a coaster in front of Jacky
and placed the drink on it.\
\"That was hardly worth the trip, Sal,\" Jacky said, grinning.\
Sal grinned back and went off to tend a customer. I drank down my beer,
knowing I wouldn\'t have to nurse it any longer. Jacky drank his down
too. \"Let me buy you a drink. Wouldn\'t you prefer scotch?\"

"No, I\'ll stick to Millers thanks.\" A subtle answer, so Jacky
wouldn\'t get the right idea.

\"Suit yourself,\" he said. \"Sal, another scotch for me and a Millers
for\...What did you say your name was?\"

\"Marvin.\"

\"For Marvin,\" Jacky said smoothly, more to me than to the bartender,
who had moved on anyway.

\"Thanks.\"

\"Cigarette?\" He held a pack of filter-tipped Parliaments, though my
Marlboro\'s were plainly visible on the bar. What the hell, I decided,
why waste them? and took a Parliament. Jacky\'s gold-plated lighter
flicked open under my nose so I didn\'t even have to lean forward to
reach the tiny flame. I dragged and could hardly taste the smoke. Goddam
filter-tips!

\"Thanks.\"

\"Are you from around here, Marvin?\"

\"No, New York.\" Actually Brooklyn, but that always caused a laugh or
some wise guy remark, so I had learned to say New York instead. Hell,
most people west of New Jersey didn\'t even know that Brooklyn was in
New York City.

\"You don\'t sound like you\'re from New York.\"

One thing good about learning a foreign language was that you had to
concentrate on your pronunciation and I had begun to watch my English as
well to weed out the Brooklynese.

\"Well, I am.\"

\"In the army here?\"

\"Yeah.\"

\"Ford Ord?\"

\"Language School.\"

\"Thank God!\"

I looked at him. \"Why?\"

\"Well, you know,\" Jacky said smiling, \"you can at least have an
intelligent conversation with a Language School student, which isn\'t
often the case with the ones from Fort Ord. You\'re an officer, I
suppose.\"

\"Why do you suppose that? Officers are assholes.\"

He laughed loudly. \"Marvin, you\'re a man after my own heart, and
you\'re absolutely right. Officers are assholes.\"

I glanced at the couples at the piano, but they obviously couldn\'t
hear. \"So why did you suppose I was one?\"

\"Oh god, please don\'t be angry. I just wanted to know and I couldn\'t
very well have said: You\'re a private, I suppose? I mean what if you
were an officer. Where would I be then?\"

\"Up shit\'s creek?\" I laughed as I said it.

\"Absolutely.\"

\"Not many officers in the Language School,\" I said. I liked the game
of denigrating officers, but kept my voice low. \"They\'re too dumb.\"

\"I agree, absolutely, at least the few I\'ve met.\"

I didn\'t say anything. I was waiting for the proposition.

\"What language are you studying?\" Jacky asked.

\"Russian.\"

\"Russian? Wow, that must be difficult.\"

\"Yeah, but it\'s better than Chinese.\"

\"Oh God, yes. I speak some French myself, but I\'d never think of
trying a difficult language like Russian. What ever made you pick it?\"

\"I didn\'t have much choice. They called a few of us to Classification
and Assignment one day in Basic Training and said that the tests showed
we had linguistic abilities and offered a choice between Swedish,
Russian and Chinese Mandarin, we should write down our preference. I put
Russian because I\'d like to be able to read Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy in
the original. So I got it -- Russian I mean. The others all put down
Swedish and none of them got anything. They\'re in Vietnam now\".

\"I love Dostoyevsky,\" Jacky crooned.

\"Yeah, well I\'m still far away from being able to read him in Russian,
the way the course is going, prisoner interrogation exercises, that kind
of shit.\" \"How long have you been here?\"

\"Two months.\"

\"So you have ten months left?\"

So Jacky knew that Russian was a year-long course. Well, why not? He was
from around here.

\"That\'s right.\"

\"Wonderful!\" He patted the back of my hand. \"We have time to get
acquainted.\"

\"Here it comes,\" I thought. \"Yeah, but I doubt if there\'s time to
learn enough Russian to read Dostoyevsky or Tolstoy in the original.
They\'re tough.\"

\"Would you be very disappointed if you couldn\'t, Marvin?\"

\"Not very, but disappointed, sure, I guess.\"

\"I think it\'s a question of what one expects from life. If one has no
expectations one can\'t be disappointed. Don\'t you think so?\"

\"Well, I think life would be pretty boring without expectations.\"

\"But not disappointing.\"

\"I don\'t know about that.\"

\"Have you ever been disappointed, Frank,\" Jacky asked and laughed. \"I
don\'t know where you find room for all that beer. Sal, another round,
please.\"

\"You\'re keeping up with me.\"

\"Yes, but there\'s less liquid involved.\"

\"More potent liquid though...and yes, I have.\"

\"Have what, Frank?\"

\"Yes, I have been disappointed.\"

\"But you\'re so young to have been disappointed, unless in love.\" He
smiled. Actually he was a handsome guy. \"But then Romeo was awfully
young.¬† Have you been disappointed in love then, Frank? I have. Often.\"

\"Yeah, especially the last time,\" I said, wondering why I was about to
tell him about Olga when I hadn\'t mentioned her to anyone else, not
even my buddies up at the Presidium. I was too young to know that we are
always on the lookout for a sympathetic listener. And Jacky was
certainly one, while my buddies would only have shook their heads and
laughed.

\"Oh, do tell me.\" Jacky leaned to his left until our shoulders were
touching and looked at me intently, ready to listen.

\"Well, I went up to San Francisco.\" I didn\'t mention that it had been
last weekend. I had driven up alone in my 1949 Hudson Hornet the Friday
after payday, alone because I'm a loner, that\'s what people say about
me and I suppose it\'a true. I had only one real friend on the hill in
the Language School, Jim McCrea, but Jim was black which was a big
disadvantage when girls were involved. In fact it was a disadvantage
when anything was involved once you got off base. There was no Jim Crow
in California like in the South, but there was a more subtle
discrimination. Jim and I had driven around sightseeing and had eaten
together in restaurants and went to Shorty\'s bar, which was just
outside the base, at least once a week to drink ten cent beer and listen
to jazz on the jukebox they had there and talk a lot. But whenever there
were likely looking girls in the place, which wasn\'t often, I regretted
being with Jim because it was impossible to pick up a couple of white
girls -- and they were always in pairs -- if you were with Jim. Even if
you went to town, like tonight, you might get into trouble if some
townie or redneck from Fort Ord decided to pick a fight because Jim was
black. Jim knew it, of course, so he never went to the bars in town. I
had to do that. It was a rotten situation that I hated, but if you were
after pussy that was how it was and if I had to choose between pussy --
or the chance of it -- and Jim ... well, that\'s the way it was.

It took about three hours to get to Frisco because there was no good
thruway yet. Once there, I checked into the YMCA for three bucks a night
that I paid in advance and went cruising. I had consumed a lot of beer
by the time I walked into that bar without noticing its name -- an
oversight I would eternally regret.

It was about midnight and the place was jumping. There was a rectangular
bar, served by two bartenders on all fours sides, a crowded dance floor
and booths. The first unusual thing was that there was a dance floor at
all, the second that the place was well lighted instead of half dark. It
was the antithesis of the Gilded Cage. I stood at the bar and ordered a
Bud draft. The booths ran all along the walls and I inspected them.
There were a lot of girls in the place but they were already with guys.
I regretted that I hadn\'t found the place sooner. Now I\'d have to try
to cut someone out or wait for someone new to come in.

Then I spotted Olga. Although there must have been a lot of servicemen
there -- we were in the middle of the Vietnam War after all -- none were
in uniform except the sailor in a funny uniform who was sitting in the
booth across from her. The sailor moved his hand brusquely and knocked
over a wine bottle. The girl tried to wipe the spilled wine with a paper
napkin while he laughed. He must have been drunk. I saw my opportunity
and grabbed a rag from the sink below the bar and walked over to them.
\"You won\'t get it dry with that piece of paper, Miss,\" I said, and
wiped up the beer. The sailor clapped me on the shoulder laughing and
said something in French.

\"What\'d he say?\" I asked her.

\"He thinks you\'re a waiter. He asked for another bottle of wine.\" She
smiled at me and I smiled back. She had an accent which I thought
recognized, having heard it often enough during the past two months.

\"He looks like he\'s had enough,\" I said. \"But hey, I\'m not a
waiter, so don\'t ask me.\"

The Frenchy suddenly keeled over on his side.

\"What\'d I tell you?\" I pushed him upright and sat down next to him
across from the girl and the sailor slumped against me. \"You\'re
Russian, aren\'t you?\"

\"Does it show so much?\"

I looked her over carefully as if to decide whether it showed. Her
cheekbones were a little high, eyes set wide apart, full lips. Her brown
hair flowed over her shoulders front and back with ragged bangs on her
forehead. She was wearing a greenish print dress that looked like it
came straight out of a World War II Care package. Her bosom was full,
apparent, although the dress was buttoned up almost to her neck, to
anyone who looked, and I was looking. No makeup. Pretty. She looked very
young at first glance, but her eyes were older.

\"No,\" I said, \"I recognize the accent.\"

\"Most people think I\'m Polish. How did you guess I\'m Russian?\"¬†

\"That\'s because there\'s so many Poles around and not many Russians,\"
I said. \"I recognized the accent because I\'m around Russians all the
time. I\'m studying Russian at the Army Language School. *Ya izuchayu
russkie Yazuik f'armeskiye shkole Yizikom*.\"¬†

At that she clapped her hands happily and let out a stream of Russian of
which I only caught a few words.

\"Hey, wait a minute, I\'ve only been at it a couple of months.\"

She repeated it slowly and, though I still didn\'t understand
everything, I got the drift: \"How wonderful. The only people I know
here who speak Russian are Russians, and they bore me.\"

\"Do I bore you?\"

\"Of course not. That\'s what I meant.\" We both smiled. The juke box
started to play *As Time Goes By* and I tried to think of the word for
dance in Russian and finally decided that I never knew it.

\"Would you like to dance?\"

\"*Konyechno*.\"

I pushed the sailor away until he was leaning against the wall, but not
until after his head bounced against it.

\"Be careful!\" she cried.

\"Don\'t worry,\" I said as we walked to the dance floor, \"he can feel
no pain. "Where did you ever find that guy?\"

\"He\'s a friend of my uncle\'s who lives in Paris. Actually he\'s the
son of my uncle\'s friend.\" She looked back at the sailor. \"His ship
sails at dawn and he has to get back somehow.\"

We began a bit stiffly, but she was soon snuggling up against me and I
could smell the delicate perfume of her hair. I pulled my crotch back so
she wouldn\'t feel my incipient erection, not yet anyway. I had already
drunk enough beer to feel light-headed.

\"*Kak vasho imyo*?\" I asked, the easiest question there was.

She laughed though.

\"What\'s so funny?\"

\"You\'re so formal. My name is Olga, but you would normally use the
familiar form of the pronoun under the present circumstances: *Kak tvayo
imyo*?\"

\"We haven\'t had the familiar form yet.\"

\"Well, we can\'t very well continue as if I were your professor, so we
better speak English.\"

\"Excellent idea, Olga. I love your name.\"

\"Oh dear, and it\'s such a common name in Russia.\"

\"Not here. Here it\'s beautiful -- to me at least.\"

\"And your name?\" she asked leaning back to look in my eyes, which
caused her hips to swivel into me.

\"Marvin.\" My erection was in full bloom. I moved back so it was only
touching her lightly.

\"You don\'t have to do that,\" she said. \"I like it.\"

Godamm, my dream had been answered, my ship had come in. I was on the
verge of shacking up in Frisco with a beautiful Russian woman, who not
only liked erections and wasn\'t afraid to say so, but could help me
learn Russian.

A Chubby Checker teenybop number blasted out of the jukebox and Olga
said she didn\'t like it so we went to the bar instead of back to the
booth, where Frenchy was still out cold. She didn\'t want anything more
to drink though, said she already had too much wine. I ordered a beer,
drank it down and ordered another. I had worked up a real thirst from
dancing and the expectation of what was to come -- that night and many
future weekends.

Olga took a sip of my beer. \"I don\'t think that Philippe is in any
condition to get back to his ship,\" she said, frowning.

\"He\'s only asleep,\" I said. \"He\'ll be all right.\"

\"I hope so.\" She looked at her watch. \"It\'s almost two o\'clock.\"

\"Good. This place will be open another hour. Let\'s dance.\" The divine
Sarah Vaughan was singing *A Foggy Day*. She meant in London town, but
San Francisco town was pretty foggy too.

\"I don\'t know how he\'ll get back to his ship.\"

\"After this number we\'ll go back, wake him up and put him in a cab,\"
I said, hoping that either the sailor or she had money to pay for it.

\"Oh no, we couldn\'t do that.\"

\"He\'s probably got money, sailors always do after hoarding it up at
sea.\"

\"That\'s just it,\" she protested. \"You know what taxi drivers are
like. A drunk sailor. He\'d be robbed...\"

\"Rolled,\" I corrected her. \"Not necessarily. All cabbies aren\'t
crooks. Why are you worrying about him so much anyway?\" I didn\'t want
to sound jealous, but I was.

\"Don\'t you see? I\'m responsible for him. They gave him my name in
Paris because they knew he was coming here. He called me -- he\'s very
nice when he\'s sober -- and I took him out to see San Francisco. He had
too much to drink. If anything happens to him I\'d be responsible. Do
you see?\"

\"Yeah, I guess so.\"

\"You have a car, Marvin. Could you take him?\"

\"Well, I don\'t know,\" though I did know: I couldn\'t refuse her.
\"Where\'s his ship at?\"

He said it was at l\'ille du tresor. Was it a joke?\"

\"No, that would be Treasure Island, it\'s a naval base under the Bay
Bridge to Oakland.\"

\"So you know it!\"

\"I passed it a couple of times going over the bridge, that\'s all. I
saw the sign.\"

\"Will you take him, Marvin, please?\"

\"O.K., we\'ll all go.\" I tried to push her into dance mode again, but
she stood still.

\"No, I\'m a foreigner, they wouldn\'t let me in. And.. well\...my
papers aren\'t completely in order yet.\"

Shit. Was she a spy? Were they both spies? Who cares.

\"But you\'re in the military. They\'d let you in. I\'ll wait here for
you.\"

\"What if this place is closed when I get back? You can\'t stand waiting
on the corner at three o\'clock in the morning.\"

Her eyes opened wide; they were green like her dress. \"I\'ll give you
my telephone number. If it\'s closed when you get back, call me.\" She
smiled. \"I\'ll be waiting.\"

My first priority had been to go to her place when the bar closed.
Failing that, I wanted her phone number. I wasn\'t sure that she\'d give
it to me. After all, I was only a barroom pick up. Now, however, I was
sure of getting it, and I couldn\'t refuse her anyway. \"Okay,\" I said,
\"let\'s get it over with.\"

We went back to the booth and I shook Frenchy and slapped his cheeks. He
woke up and babbled in French.

Olga took one of the paper napkins from its holder and wrote her
telephone number on it. I put it in my pocket, I couldn\'t remember
which one afterwards, although I certainly thought about it a lot.

\"C\'mon Robespierre, let\'s get you presentable.\" I pulled him across
the booth seat and got him standing.

\"What are you doing?\" Olga asked.

\"Taking him to the john to put some cold water on his face and get him
to take a leak or he\'ll piss all over the car.\"

\"Jesus, I never saw anyone so drunk from wine,\" I said as we
maneuvered him out of the bar upon our return from the men\'s room.
\"Refused to piss, that\'s his problem.\"

\"He was a little tipsy when he came to my place,\" Olga said, sounding
as though she was defending him. \"Who knows how much he had to drink.\"

My car was a block away and as the three of us weaved downhill the
sailor started singing -- in French of course.

\"Christ, Just what I needed,\" I said. \"Tell him to shut up before the
MPs hear him, or SPs if that\'ll impress him more.\"

He shut up quick when Olga translated. We dumped him in the front seat
of the Hudson and Olga kissed me on the lips, not passionately, but
lovingly yes, I decided.

I took some wrong turns so it took longer to find the Bay Bridge than
I\'d expected. The fog had gotten worse so I had to drive more carefully
than usual. I remembered that the sign to Treasure Island was somewhere
near the middle of the bridge, so I hugged the right lane in order not
to miss the turn-off, which was on the bridge itself. The fog was even
thicker on the bridge and I drove slowly, for me, hunched over the
steering wheel. Then I felt the car descending and had a sinking feeling
in my stomach. I had missed the exit to Treasure Island. And I couldn\'t
very well make a U-turn on a bridge when I couldn\'t see what might be
coming from the other direction. So I had to continue into Oakland, turn
and go back over the bridge. I knew there was only one turn-off and it
was on the right side going towards Oakland. So I had to drive all the
way back into Frisco, turn and head back to Oakland.

This time I went ten miles an hour and finally saw the sign: it was
hanging over the middle of the bridge, that\'s why I hadn\'t seen it the
first time across. They must have moved it. I cursed and eased the
Hudson down the ramp onto Treasure Island and stopped at the guard
booth.

\"Where ya goin, sir,\" a huge SP said. The \"sir\" was just in case I
was an officer.

\"I\'m trying to get this French sailor back to his ship,\" I said,
trying to sound like one.

\"Uh huh. ID, please.\"

I showed him my ID, which definitely established my non-officer status.

\"Where ya stationed, soldier?\" the SP asked.

\"Army Language School, Monterey.\"

\"What\'s the matter wit ya friend?\"

I looked over at the sailor, who had fallen asleep again. \"He had one
too many, I guess.\" I gave him a jab in the chest with my elbow to wake
him up. \"He\'s French.\"

\"Yeah, I had a bunch of \'em rollin in tonight. What about you?\"

\"No sweat, I\'m okay.\"

\"You better be. I keep your ID and you can pick it up when you leave.\"
He noted down the Hudson\'s license plate number on a chart and went
back into his booth.

\"Hey,\" I yelled.

\"Waddya want?\"

\"Can you tell me where the French ship is?\"

The SP checked a chart hanging in the booth and said: \"Pier 21. Go
straight till ya can\'t no more, turn right till ya can\'t no more, then
right again and that\'s it. Got a French flag on it I guess.\"

\"What\'s a French flag look like?\"

\"How the fuck should I know.\"

I followed the SP\'s instructions and found the ship. An armed French
sailor on guard duty was standing at the foot of the gangplank. I looked
at my watch: three o\'clock. Shit, the bar was closing. What\'s it
called? \"Hey, Frenchy,\" I said to the sailor, \"what\'s the name of
that bar we were in?\"

He looked at me blankly.

\"Comment lapel le bar?\" No reaction.

\"Hey,\" I called to the guard, \"come and get this asshole.\" He
didn\'t move. I got out, opened the door and dragged Frenchy out. Then I
grabbed the hat with the red pom from the seat and placed it on his head
and pushed him at the sailor, who had no choice but to catch him.

\"Adieu, shitheads.\"

I parked on a deserted street in San Francisco and looked through my
pockets for the napkin. It wasn\'t there. I looked desperately, turning
my pockets out. Then I took a flashlight from the glove compartment and
searched the car -- floor, seats, everywhere. No napkin.

\"Can we help you, sir?\" one of the two MPs who appeared behind me
said.

\"No, I was just looking for sumpin.\" Damn it, I wasn\'t drunk anymore,
why was I slurring my speech.

\"You in the service?\"

\"Yeah. Who isn\'t?\" Wise guys answers, just what MPs like to hear.

\"Let\'s see your ID.\"

Here we go again.

Finally they let me go but made me leave my car where it was, claiming I
was drunk, and told me to go right back to the Y and if they saw me
again that night I\'d spend the rest of it in the clink.

All day Sunday I searched for the bar where I had found and lost Olga,
but didn\'t find it. It was as if it had vanished into thin air or never
really existed. At three o\'clock in the morning I drove back to
Monterey, not too drunk but enough to be picked up, so I drove
carefully. I had to be in class at seven and sick calls on Monday
mornings were frowned upon.

Marvin,\" Jacky said with a crooked smile, \"I can imagine how you
felt - and I\'m sorry, truly I am.\"

My glass was empty and I called Sal without bothering to wait for Jacky
to invite me to have another.

\"On the other hand, I think it goes to prove my thesis.\"

\"Oh yeah? How\'s that?\"

\"Well, if you hadn\'t had the expectation that you\'d found the perfect
shack job who would help you with Russian as well, you wouldn\'t have
been disappointed when she didn\'t materialize. See what I mean?\"

\"Yeah, I guess so.\" But it was more than that. I had fallen head over
heels in love with Olga and I needed to find her. No need to tell Jackie
that though.

*As Time Goes By* was being played again.

\"God, I\'m beginning to hate that song,\" Jacky said.

\"Me too.\" I hadn\'t mentioned the detail that that was the song Olga
and I had first danced to.

\"What kind of music do you like, Marvin, I mean really like?\"

\"Oh you know, Jazz, blues. Sarah Vaughan knocks me out, but I guess
she\'s not coming in here.\"

\"My God, Marvin, I knew we were kindred spirits,\" Jacky gushed.
\"Listen, I have an idea.\"

Here it comes, finally.

\"Let\'s go to my place. I have the most fantastic jazz collection you
ever heard, including plenty of Sarah Vaughan, before she went
commercial.\"

\"I like her commercial too.\"

\"Well so do I, but the non-commercial stuff is better, believe me. How
about it?\"

\"Where do you live?\"

\"Carmel.\" Exactly where I had guessed he lived.

\"Oh, no then, I couldn\'t go there.\"

\"Why in heaven\'s name not?\"

\"No gas. I\'ll be lucky to get back to the Presidium-\"

Jacky laughed, obviously much relieved. \"No problem my dear friend,
we\'ll go in my car and I\'ll bring you back later, if you like, or
tomorrow. I have plenty of room.\"

\"Naw, I always like to have my own wheels,\" I intoned, smoking calmly.
\"Thanks anyway.\"

Jacky laughed again. \"Marvin, you\'re amazing. You make problems out of
nothing. Come on, let\'s get gas for your car, silly.\"

I\'m afraid I\'m sort of broke, Jacky,\" I said, although there were
still four dollars and seventy cents in front of me on the bar.

\"I had no intention of letting you pay for it even if you had the
money. When you\'re my guest it means in everything.\" He clapped me on
the shoulder. \"Sal, my bill, please!\"

I only needed about a dollar\'s worth of gas to get to Carmel and back,
but I told the attendant at the service station to fill it up. I looked
at my watch: ten o\'clock, plenty of time. Jacky had pulled his white
Mercedes into the station away from the pumps and stood waiting with his
arms folded and a big grin on his face. When the attendant hung up the
gas hose he strolled over and paid for my gas.

¬† \"Follow me, okay Marvin? Can\'t lose that car.\" He put his wallet in
his pocket and started back to his Mercedes whistling *As Time Goes By*,
realized it and stopped.

\"Jacky,\" I called.

\"Yes, Marvin?\" He turned around and came back. \"What is it?\"

\"I\'m not going to your place, Jacky, it was just a con. I needed the
gas to get to Frisco, see? To look for Olga.\"

Jacky was openly crestfallen, but he didn\'t beg, I have to give him
that. \"I see,\" he said, looking at the ground. Actually, I kind of
felt sorry for him. He was a nice guy, basically -- but he wasn't Olga.

I got back into the Hudson, closed the door and said through the open
window as I started the engine: \"You shouldn\'t have expectations,
Jacky, and you wouldn\'t be disappointed.\" I didn't mean it
sarcastically, although it came out that way.¬†

I closed the window against the cold drizzle, turned on the windshield
wipers and gunned the Hudson Hornet towards San Francisco where I, at
least, still had expectations. I should have listened to my own advice
though, for I never found Olga there.

### 6

#### Camp King, Oberursel, West Germany

Second Lt. Marvin Jacks tied his sneaker shoelaces and stood up. He
heard basketball sounds coming from the gym: hard bounces on a wooden
floor, the clang when the ball hit the rim, a whumpf when it went
through cleanly. Shouts of triumph or despair. He looked at himself in
the locker-room mirror and smiled with satisfaction. Smiling back at him
was a young handsome face, the only imperfection on it being a slightly
bent nose broken in a street fight during adolescence. He\'d never had
it straightened because it provided the manly touch his baby-face needed
if he was to be taken seriously. He was only slightly above average
height, too small for basketball, at least for the professional sort.

He opened the door to the gym and was surprised to see one person,
playing by himself, in the act of sinking a jump shot. He retrieved the
ball and said \"Hi\" to Jacks.

\"Hi. I thought there\'d be two complete teams in here, judging by the
noise,\" Jacks said with a smile.

\"Yeah. I like to make it realistic. No fun otherwise.\" He trotted over
and offered his hand. He was about Jacks\' height but heavier. \"Jack
Quinn. You\'re new, I guess.\"

\"Marvin Jacks. Yeah, just got in.\"

\"Welcome to Spook\'s Paradise.\" He flipped the ball to Jacks and
stationed himself under the basket. Jacks was conscious of the dramatic
effect a basket on first try would make. He bounced the ball twice,
drifted to the center of the court and let loose a long jumper that
bounced vertically off the rim, touched the backboard and went in.

\"Good shot.\"

\"Lucky.\"

\"Same difference.\"

They spent the next fifteen minutes dribbling, passing behind their
backs and shooting with uncanny accuracy. An observer would have thought
they\'d been playing together for years.

\"You from New York?\" Jacks asked, knowing he was because the accent
was unmistakable.

\"Sure. You too, I bet.\"

\"Brooklyn.\"

\"No kidding. What part?\"

\"Flatbush. What other part is there?\"

\"Bensonhurst, that\'s what other part.\"

\"You play good ball,\" Jacks said as he missed a jumper. \"Who\'d you
play for?\"

\"Playground ball. You?\"

\"Erasmus High.\"

\"Good teams.\" Quinn drove in, feinted at nobody, glided under the
basket and sunk a twisting left-hander. He retrieved the ball and placed
it under his arm, a gesture that indicated that the conversation would
get serious. \"Play any baseball, Marvin?\"

\"A little, nothing to speak of.\"

\"That's OK, you\'re a good athlete. I can shape you up.\"

\"What do you mean?\" Jacks asked, wiping the sweat off his face with
his arm.

\"I mean this here\'s an M.I. unit," Quinn said, "but it\'s also a
jockstrap outfit.\"

\"No kidding?\"

\"Sure. The old man\'s a sports nut, played for Georgia Tech. Don\'t see
how myself. His best, let\'s say his only shot, is a hooker. I mean
Jesus, that went out with Ebbets Field.\"

\"Unless you happen to be seven feet tall.\"

"Which he ain\'t. Comes in to work out most every day when he\'s here.\"
As if to emphasize what he would say next, Quinn dribbled the ball
between his legs, gave it a kick-flip with his toe and caught it. \"What
I\'m saying, Marvin, is that you could spend your whole tour right here
in Camp King just playing basketball and baseball. No football, not
enough jocks and anyway the equipment\'s too expensive.\" He sighed at
that misfortune. \"It\'s a great place, food\'s fantastic, Frankfurt\'s
a half-hour away on the trolley, nothing to do but play ball.\"

\"Nothing?\"

\"A little interrogating if you don't object. Basketball in the fall and
winter, baseball in the spring and summer. That\'s all. We\'re in the
service units league. Bunch of beer-bellies. We win everything. Just say
the word. I coach both teams.\"

The locker-room door opened and a man walked onto the floor in gym
clothes. \"Hey, I thought no one was here. Didn\'t hear anything.\"

\"Howya doin\' sir? We were just takin\' a break,\" Quinn said.

\"Who are you?\" he asked Marvin.

\"Jacks, sir. Arrived today.\"

\"Oh yeah.\" He stood in the key and Quinn passed him the ball as he
moved to his left. He hooked it high off the backboard into the basket.

\"Good shot,\" Quinn cried. \"Sure haven\'t lost the old touch.\"

Colonel Moultrie Banks, Commanding Officer of the 509th M.I. Unit,
wasn\'t exactly as old as the hills. He was forty-five, tall and once
lanky, red-nosed and high-voiced and came from Moultrie, Georgia, which
one of his ancestors founded during the eighteenth century. The three of
them tossed the ball around a while, until Banks began to huff and puff
and the sweat poured off him in streams.

\"See you guys,\" he said and disappeared into the locker-room.

\"See what I mean?\" Quinn winked. \"Think about it and let me know.
What barracks are you in?\"

\"BOQ,\" Jacks said. From the look of surprise on Quinn's face, it was
obvious he hadn't known that Jacks was an officer. He knew exactly what
Jack Quinn was thinking because he\'d have been thinking it himself if
the roles had been reversed: Why didn\'t you tell me you were a fucking
officer? But all Quinn said was \"Oh\". Then, \"See ya,\" and he went
into the locker-room leaving Marvin Jacks alone feeling like a traitor,
which in a sense he was.

When the Vietnam War broke out he had already been influenced by the
romanticism of books like *From Here To Eternity* and movies like *Paths
of Glory*, which depicted officers as an arrogant, selfish, privileged
class of incompetent parasites who did not hesitate to send soldiers to
certain death for no purpose other than their own aggrandizement.

What changed in the Language School at Monterey was his perception of
moral necessity. While his comrades from basic training were being
killed and wounded in Korea he had become one of the privileged ones --
still a Private, true, but in a university atmosphere getting an
education for which he was being paid. Most of the students were
enlisted men, but the few officers were enveloped by enhanced privilege.
They were paid much more, had new or nearly new cars and were treated
almost as equals by the aristocratic staff of Russian teachers, who
invited them to their homes, something a mere soldier could never attain
to.

Marvin saw all this, but combined with resentment he felt envy. He began
to like army life. He was part of a great family, the members of which
were fed, clothed, housed and paid without having to work. The
possibility of being wounded or killed in a war was always present of
course, but he had been able to avoid that so far.

Halfway through his one-year Russian course he applied for OCS. Again,
to his surprise he was accepted and attended the Officers Candidate
School at Fort Benning, Georgia after Language School, for six months,
still not long enough for the war in Vietnam to have ended. But there
was still the Cold War. So he was sent off to Germany and still another
school, the Intelligence and Military Police School in Oberammergau,
Bavaria, where he was supposed to learn how to be a spy. It was only a
three-week course and amateurish. The only thing he remembered from it
was how to conduct surveillance and a two-day long course in German
history, given by a Master Sergeant who really knew his stuff. Jacks
wondered what the hell he was doing in the army, and as an Enlisted Man.
He could have become an officer but probably didn\'t want to, for which
Jacks admired him more than for his historical erudition.

### 7

Lieutenant Jacks reported to his Commanding Officer, Colonel G. Moultrie
Banks, on the day after his arrival at Camp King.

\"Just get in, Lieutenant?\" Banks asked, reading his personal file.

\"Yesterday, sir. We sort of met at the gym yesterday.\"

He looked up at Jacks and frowned. \"Oh yes. I thought you were a friend
of Quinn's.\"

\"No, sir. Never saw him before.\"

\"Good ball player, Quinn.\"

\"Yes, sir.\"

\"Sit down.\" Jacks sat down. \"You\'re pretty good yourself.\"

\"I could say the same for you, sir.\" It was the right thing to say. In
fact, if Marvin hadn\'t used exactly those words at exactly that time
and in that place and in that admiring but matter-of-fact manner, his
whole life might have been different.

The Colonel smiled modestly. \"Oh, I used to be pretty good, had a great
hook shot if I do say so myself.\" He entered into a long account of his
basketball prowess at Georgia Tech. \"I don\'t regret turning down that
pro offer because that\'s about when the really big guys came along and
my hook-shot wouldn\'t\'ve stood a snowball\'s chance in hell against
them.\"

Marvin didn\'t dispute it. He waited.

Banks looked down again at his file. \"My problem now is what the hell
to do with you, Jacks.\"

\"Sir?\"

\"I see you\'re a Russian linguist. Three fluents.

\"Yes, sir.\"

\"Do you have any suggestions as to what we\'re supposed to do with
another Russian linguist around here?\"

\"Well\...no, sir.\"

\"Of course you don\'t. Are you expecting a war with Russia any time
soon?\"

\"Not really.\"

\"Neither am I. Of course we\'ve got the shit squad, but there\'s
already a Major and two Captains there who do nothing and three
naturalized Russian Enlisted Men who do the work.\"

\"The shit squad, sir?\" Jacks asked, worried.

\"We got spies who steal the garbage from the Russian garrisons in East
Germany and send the papers to us by the truckload. And the Russians use
anything they can get to wipe their asses with\...get the point? But at
least it\'s dry shit. So our shit squad reviews these\...documents, we
call them\... for potential intelligence data. Ninety-nine per cent of
it is shit, love letters, pleas to Mom to send food, and so forth. Every
once in a great while something of remote intelligence value is found.
Get the point?\"

\"Yes, sir,\" Marvin replied, more worried.

\"Is that what you\'d like to do?\"

\"Not really, sir.\" A spark of hope. Was he being given a choice?

\"Would you like to infiltrate the Soviet Union?\"

\"Well, I speak fluent Russian, but I don\'t think I\'d pass for a
Russian. No, I don\'t think there\'d be much point in that, sir.\"
Worried again, very worried.

\"No. But they keep sending me Russian linguists. Get the point?\"

\"Yes, sir.\"

\"Do you know what I need?\"

\"German linguists, sir?\"

\"Right, by God\". He lit a cigarette and offered one to Marvin, who
accepted it. \"I knew you had a head on your shoulders. Do you know
why?\"

\"I\'d rather pass on that one, sir, as I don\'t know much about the
operation yet. Except to say that we are in Germany, after all.\"

Banks grinned. \"It\'s really obvious, isn\'t it? This here\'s an
interrogation center. We get a Russian once in a blue moon and we get to
keep him about two days before the CIA comes and grabs him. But we get
loads of Germans: Volkspolizei, politicians, spies, double agents,
phonies, the works. So they send me Russian linguists. I get some
Germans, linguists I mean, but most aren\'t up to the job. Do you know
why?\"

\"No, sir.\"

\"No balls.\" He waited for a reaction, but Jacks was impassive, feeling
that was the appropriate stance for someone with balls. \"They can be
interrogators, but do you know what I really need?\"

Jacks could tell that the Colonel was an experienced interrogator. \"No,
sir\".

\"Recruiters. Do you know what they do?\"

\"More or less. They mentioned the subject in Oberammergau.\"

\"Yeah. Well, you gotta be able to drink beer and talk soccer to Germans
to gain their confidence. Do you do those things?\"

\"Yes, sir,\" which was half a lie. He drank beer, who doesn\'t? But
talk soccer, who does?

\"Goddamn,\" Colonel Banks exclaimed. \"You play soccer?\"

\"Used to. Not too much, but I could hold my own.\"

\"Where?\"

\"High school.\" A lie, he\'d never played soccer in his life and
didn\'t know the first thing about it. He resolved to get a book on the
game first thing if he got out of this interview without the Colonel
asking technical questions and finding him out.

\"Well, waddaya know. Can\'t stand the thing myself. Sorta sissy game,
don\'t you think?\"

\"Not really, sir. Of course it\'s not football, but it can be rough and
you have to be in good shape\". Couldn\'t be anything wrong in that, he
thought.

Colonel Banks sighed. \"I guess you\'re right. The Germans aren\'t
exactly pansies and they go for it big\".

Jacks nodded wisely.

\"You\'d make a good recruiter, Jacks, but you don\'t speak German, do
you?\"

\"As a matter of fact I do, sir.\"

Banks opened his eyes wide. \"You do? Where'd you learn German?"

"From my mother. She was German."

"Well, I'll be dollgarned. Read and write it too?

"Not as well as speaking. But yes, though I make mistakes writing."

"Who the hell doesn't? How come that's not in your records?"

"Don't know, sir. I guess because they never asked."

"Son, you have come to the right place. What do you know about
interrogation?"

"What they taught us in Russian at the Language School. I guess the
technique's the same for German."

"Yes, well, what they taught you and the reality aren't exactly the
same. But practice makes perfect, just like in basketball.

\"Right, sir.\"

"You can observe interrogations for a while, then do some easy ones on
your own. Meantime tell Quinn to set you up for the basketball team.
Play baseball too?"

"Some, Sir."

"OK, glad to have you aboard, Jacks."

\"That\'s good of you, sir.\" He was saying all the right things, he
realized. Robert E. Pruitt of *From Here to Eternity* would act
differently. Well, you have to watch your own ass in the real world.

### 8

Marvin Jacks was ebullient. He went to the Officers\' Club because he
was passing it and was thirsty after that throat-drying interview with
Col. Moultrie Banks. It had been the German Officers\' Club before the
Americans took it over and it was opulent. Marvin passed an empty
reading room and entered the bar. There was only one early bird in
civilian clothes perched on a bar stool reading Stars and Stripes.
Marvin did a double take: it was Jack Quinn. So he was an officer after
all. What had made Marvin discount that possibility? Something straight,
honest, unhypocritical about him? He was relieved and at the same time
somehow disappointed. He approached smiling and said, \"Hi, Jack.\"
Quinn turned his head sideways, saw who it was, said \"Hi\", and resumed
reading. A brush off.

"How\'s everything, Jack?\"

Quinn looked at him stonily. \"Look, top grade enlisted men can use the
officers\' club on this base, which I don\'t normally do. I\'m waiting
for Colonel Banks, who wants to talk to me about the sports program and
this is his favorite place. That\'s just in case you\'re wondering what
I\'m doing here or in case you might confuse me with an officer.\"

Marvin ordered a beer and tried to think of what to say. It would be
stupid to apologize, he had nothing to apologize for, rather it was
Quinn who was being rude. Better be matter-of-fact.

\"What rank are you, anyway?\"

Without looking up from his paper, Quinn answered, \"Master Sergeant.\"

That\'s who he reminded him of: the Master Sergeant Burt Lancaster
played in *From Here To Eternity*. He despised officers, too. \"You\'re
pretty young to be a Master Sergeant,\" Marvin said.

Quinn sighed and closed the paper in a show of resignation. \"Thank
Vietnam,\" he said, \"in case you\'ve heard of it. Rank comes fast there
if you stay long enough.\"

\"How long were you there?\"

\"Long enough.\" Then, to the German barman, \"*Noch ein Bier, Hans,
bitte*.\"

\"Do you speak German?\"

\"Everyone learns to order another beer after three days here. But as a
matter of fact I do. That\'s why I\'m in this outfit.\"

\"Language school?\"

\"No, my old lady."

\"German speakers being in such short supply," Jacks said, "I\'m
surprised you aren\'t employed differently\".

\"I told you, Colonel Banks is a sports nut. Look, Jacks, I shot off my
mouth yesterday about all that thinking you were\...not knowing what you
were. I\'d appreciate your keeping it to yourself\".

He talks to me as though he were the colonel, Marvin thought, but
that\'s the way Master Sergeants are. \"No problem,\" he said. "By the
way, Colonel Banks told me to tell you to set me up for the basketball
team."

\"Wow, good for you. You must have made a big hit with the old man. And
it takes an expert ass-kisser to do that.\" Nasty.

\"You seem to be pretty good at it yourself,\" Marvin retorted, giving
up the attempt to be friendly, let alone make friends.

But he didn\'t know Jack Quinn, who frowned, then grinned. \"The only
genuine, successful ass-kissers in this man\'s army are officers, of
which select group you are one. But maybe you\'re different. After all,
you *are* from Brooklyn, so you can\'t be all bad\".

Colonel Banks clapped Quinn on the shoulder. \"Hello, Jack.\" He ignored
Marvin Jacks.

\"Hi, Colonel,\" Quinn greeted him. Marvin picked up his beer, mumbled
an apology and slunk off. They didn\'t hear him.

### 10

"Are you comfortable in your quarters, Frau Cornelius?" Lt. Jacks asked
the attractive young lady seated across from him in Bavarian-American
accented German. It was his first interrogation on his own, but he had
been advised that it was routine, she was merely a defector's wife. The
room was small but tastefully decorated and they sat in padded chairs.
During the war the Germans had used it for the good-cop part of
interrogation. If the P.O.W.s, American and British flyers, were not
cooperative they went next to the dungeon below for a few days for
bad-cop softening up, no torture, just isolation, were then brought back
up for more officer and gentleman treatment. Most stuck to the name,
rank and serial number bit, but some were willing to discuss personal
things like wives, children, home towns, with their interrogators, and
this inevitably led to elements of military information. Either way,
they all wound up in P.O.W. camps.

The East Germans the Americans questioned were told they were there
voluntarily and were free to go at any time -- which was partly true:
they could leave, but if they didn't return within twenty-four hours
they would be picked up by the German police and turned over to West
German Intelligence, where they were threatened with being sent back
East, the result being that they rushed back to Camp King apologizing
profusely.

Jacks had read her husband's interrogation file and had to corroborate
the personal information, then ask her about the Foreign Affairs
Ministry, where she had worked in the travel department. Finally, what
they asked all defectors: conditions in the German Democratic Republic.

She had it all down pat: told Jacks about her husband's military career
-- going nowhere because of his lack of motivation, which created
suspicion -- the names of Foreign Affairs Ministry officials and their
travel history, as well as she could remember. Mostly they traveled
around the Eastern bloc, including Moscow; only the higher ups went to
the west, and they were too important for her to handle. Conditions? She
was supposed to tell the truth, and she did: shortages of almost
everything, although she was privileged in that respect because of her
job in the Ministry. But all her relatives and friends expected her to
buy things for them, and she had to ask an official, which she didn't
like to do, especially as most of them expected sexual favors in return,
which she refused to give. The Stasi informers were everywhere, so there
was no freedom of speech, no freedom at all in fact. They had wanted her
to be an informer and she refused, which made any possibility for
advancement impossible. And everyone knows that the Russians are really
in charge, that the so-called German Democratic Republic is nothing but
a puppet and the Russians are hated. She added, almost as an
afterthought, that if the wall came down the whole population might go
over to the west. Did they already know that? She asked herself. Was she
going too far?

"Frau Cornelius," her American interrogator was saying. "Is something
wrong?" And she realized that there were tears in her eyes and she had
almost forgotten his presence.

"No, I'm sorry, it's just that..."

Marvin Jacks had the impression that she looked familiar, even thought
of that young Russian woman he\'d met in the bar in San Francisco, and
then lost. He\'d only been with her for less than a hour and his memory
of her was dim, especially because he had been at least half-drunk. It
didn\'t occur to him that this could be the same person.

### 11

Frankfurt, December 1968

Lt. Marvin Jacks rented a room in a pension on Hamburger Allee in
Frankfurt. He smiled at the street's name. Did it make the love affair
sound trite, even ridiculous? In German the reference was to the city of
Hamburg, and he had every intention of keeping it a secret as far as his
American compatriots were concerned. He didn't want them installing bugs
in the room. The only other person who knew about it was the lady in
question: Frau Anneliese Cornelius. Lt. Cornelius and frau had been
thoroughly debriefed and they were let loose to pursue their lives in
West Germany. There was, however, a shade of suspicion, on the part of
Master Sergeant Jack Quinn, that they might be Stasi agents.

Quinn hadn't participated in any of the interrogations, but he\'d read
the reports, as Colonel Banks routinely asked him to do. Then the
meeting with Banks and the two interrogators, the other being a First
Lt. Hamburg (sic). Although outranked by everyone, Quinn ran the
meeting. Hamburg and Jacks had copies of the interrogation reports on
their laps; Quinn had no papers. Banks looked bored.

"You guys say you're satisfied these people are on the level, right?"
Quinn asked, looking at the two officers one after the other. Actually
neither had written exactly that in their reports. Like good bureaucrats
covering themselves just in case they had written that they found no
indication that the Cornelius couple weren't what they said they were:
real defectors. Lt. Hamburg, was annoyed by being treated as a
subordinate by an enlisted man, Col. Banks' favorite because he had a
good jump shot. He also knew from experience, however, that Quinn had a
nose for smelling lies. Not lies exactly -- any interrogator worth his
salt could do that -- but half-truths, which were much harder to detect.
Sgt. Quinn could detect them; he called it intuition. And that's why
Col. Banks had him read all the interrogation reports before making
final decisions. "I found no indication that he isn\'t," Hamburg said.

"Same difference." Quinn brushed off Hamburg's correction. He questioned
Jacks with his eyebrows. "I found nothing in Frau Cornelius's story to
think otherwise," Jacks said.

"Well, you might both be right, but something about this bothers me." He
looked at Col. Banks, seated behind his large desk, to see if he was
paying attention. Banks was. "Go on, Sergeant," he said, stroking his
mustache wisely.

"Just for a moment let's assume that they are Stasi agents," Quinn said.
"One's an army officer, the other works in the Foreign Ministry,
according to their cover story at least. This makes them interesting,
right?"

"Certainly does," Col. Banks agreed.

"They cross over and come to us. Why?" He directed the question at Lt.
Hamburg.

"Because he's army and we're army," Hamburg replied.

"Right. But why didn't they go to the West German army? Did either of
you ask that question?" He shook his head. "Never mind, it's not in your
reports. The question, then, is: Why not?"

"Goddammit, Colonel, I wish you'd remind Sgt. Quinn that we're officers
and he should address us as such."

Col. Banks raised his eyebrows and smiled ever so faintly. Then, to
Quinn: "He's right, Sergeant. But this is an informal meeting, so let's
just get on with it."

"Why not...Lieutenant?" he looked at Jacks.

Jacks suppressed the impulse to address Quinn as Sir, and said that he
hadn't thought of it.

"And you?" looking at Hamburg and infuriating him by omission.

"Because the answer is that the West Germans would have kept them in
much less comfortable circumstances than we do, and for longer, and
would have made him join the West German army to prove his loyalty, and
as an Enlisted Man to boot."

"Good reasons to come to us instead," Quinn said, "especially the E.M.
part. But how would he know that?"

"The grapevine, Quinn, probably everyone in the East German army knows
it -- the officers anyway."

"So you assumed that was the reason and didn't bother to ask, right?"

"Right."

"And you, Lt. Jacks, didn't think of it."

Jacks nodded. He liked and admired Quinn, despite being on the hot-seat,
couldn't help it. Anyway, it was his first interrogation, and of the
woman, not the army officer, so his seat wasn't that hot.

"But there could be another reason for coming to us instead of the
Germans," Quinn went on, "an even better one." He sat back like an actor
waiting for his cue. Col. Banks supplied it: "What's that, Sergeant?"

"The Germans are a hell of a lot better at this than we are. Sorry to
admit it, Sir, but it's true, inevitable."

"Why inevitable," Col. Banks asked, frowning.

"Because they're Germans, know the German soul, can detect nuances that
we can't, know more about the East German army and Stasi. So German
Military Intelligence, if there was even the whiff of suspicion, would
have turned them over to the *Bundessicherheitsdienst* -- their CIA. We
don't do that, to us they're guests from hell who have recognized the
evils of communism and are now friends. All we want is military
information.

"That's not true, Quinn," Hamburg protested. "We look for agents, too,
all the time."

"True," Quinn rejoined calmly, "but it's not our priority; it is theirs.
Furthermore, we got turnstile interrogators and analysts. You do your
tour of duty and leave or are transferred. The draftees go home just
when they're beginning to know what they're doing. The Germans aren't
going anywhere."

"What's your point, Quinn?" Lt. Hamburg asked after an embarrassing
silence.

"I thought it was obvious, Hamburg, but...."

"Col. Banks!" Hamburg almost shouted.

"We know you're an officer, Hamburg," Banks said calmly. "We can see the
bars on your shoulders. Now just shut up and listen."

Hamburg turned beet-red, and probably didn't listen.

"Anyway," Quinn went on, "they may have come to us for the reasons
stated by Lt. Hamburg -- or they may have come because they wanted to
avoid a real, hard-ass interrogation by people who would at least
suspect them."

"You mean who have other priorities," Col. Banks said.

"Yes, Sir," Quinn smiled.

"So what do you suggest?"

"That we keep them under surveillance for a while."

"Ah," the colonel said, "and how do we do that?"

Hamburg woke up. "I can assemble a surveillance team, Sir."

Banks raised his eyebrows and looked at Quinn.

"A two-day course in Munich, which is the amount of training you guys
get, doesn't make a surveillance team, Hamburg." Hamburg opened his
mouth but nothing came out. "And if they are agents, they've been
trained to spot amateur surveillance," Quinn said. "No, we have to do it
a different way."

"Er..."

"Yes, Lt. Jacks?" Col. Banks said.

"Why don't we just turn the case over to the CIA?" It was a rhetorical
question; he knew they wouldn't buy it.

Banks smiled and again looked at Quinn. He obviously didn't want to be
quoted.

"Because they're worse than us, you can spot them as Americans a mile
away. Anyway, they probably wouldn't take it seriously. After all, we
have no facts."

"Only your intuition, Sgt. Quinn," Banks said, "and that's good enough
for me. What other way?"

"Jacks can come on to the woman. Reading between the lines of his
report, I detect a rapport."

Marvin Jacks hoped his face wasn't as red as Hamburg's. They were all
looking at him. He'd intended to get in touch with her anyway, now they
were asking him to, but for a very different reason.

"Is that the case, Lt. Jacks?" Col. Banks asked.

"Sgt. Quinn is very perceptive," Jacks said with a silly grin, "but yes,
we got on well."

"Okay, go on, Sergeant Quinn."

"We check her out for a few days, just to see if there's a pattern of
some place she goes where Jacks could bump into her, by accident that
is. Then Jacks makes a date with her, starts an affair if possible,
finds out if there's anything to my intuition about them."

"What about the husband?" Hamburg said, just to say something.

"Well," Quinn answered, "if she's a loyal wife and or a good agent,
Jacks'll get shot down -- I don't mean that literally. What do you think
about that though, Lt. Jacks?"

"Her husband's not the romantic type," Jacks said. That did get a laugh.

"You willing, Lt. Jacks?" Col. Banks asked.

After a short pretense of thinking it over, "Yes, Sir."

### 12

Quinn had a German driver, a friend of his employed by Camp King,
observe Frau Cornelius. He'd been in the Wehrmacht M.I. and had
surveillance experience, was also smart. After the first week he
reported back that she went to the flea market in Bockenheim two or
three times, bought some cheap stuff. Quinn asked him if she might be
making a contact there. The driver shrugged. "*K√∂nnte sein*," he said,
but he hadn't noticed anything, though he admitted that it would be a
perfect place for it. Quinn told Jacks to let her see and approach him,
if possible. If she didn't, he should approach her, but if he thought
she wanted to avoid him they'd drop the whole thing. "And Jacks," Quinn,
damn him, said, but Jacks was used by then to being treated as his
subordinate, "remember this is work, so don't fall for her or you might
be in trouble, if what I'm thinking is true, that is."

"Don't worry about that, Sgt. Quinn." Why worry, when it had already
happened?

The meeting came off perfectly. Jacks went to the Bockenheimer flea
market the following Saturday in civvies. It was big and he didn't look
out of place, for there were other Americans there, servicemen looking
for bargains. He saw her at a used books stand concentrated on a book
she was leafing through. He strolled to the other side of the same stand
until he was directly across from her. The book she held was the first
volume of Goethe's Complete Works. He leaned across and picked up the
second volume and opened it. She saw his hand do it of course and looked
up.

"Lt. Jacks!" she said.

He looked up innocently and pretended to be trying to place her. Then,
"Frau Cornelius, what a surprise!" He walked around the stand and they
shook hands.

"Are you interested in Goethe?" she asked him.

"I'd like to be more interested, but he's a bit difficult for me, I need
a dictionary at my elbow."

She laughed. "It's a good way to improve your German."

"Undoubtedly. Are you going to buy that book?"

"No, the dealer will only sell the complete set. He's right of course.
Why break it up?"

Jacks saw his opening. "Oh? How much does he want?" The dealer, a skinny
little man with a huge mustache, was watching them from his seat at the
opposite corner of the stand. He smelled a sale.

"A hundred marks. That's frightfully expensive for used books."

"It depends on how you look at it. If they were new they'd cost a lot
more, and the words are the same."

"I suppose you're right," she said. "And they are quite beautiful,
pre-war, of course."

"Wait here," Jacks told her. He went over to the dealer, greeted him
cordially as one must, and asked if he could reserve the complete set
with twenty marks, that he would return the next day with the rest of
the money.

"*Jawohl, Mein Herr*, you certainly may," the dealer said and held out
his hand. Jacks gave him the twenty and he took a piece of cardboard
from his pocket, printed GEKAUFT on it, and placed it on the center
volume of the set. Jacks wondered if he could get the money back as
confidential funds, but immediately decided against asking. She isn't a
spy, for God's sake.

"I'll pay him the rest tomorrow and the first volume is yours," he told
her when he was again at her side.

"But Lt. Jacks, I couldn't accept that. Besides, you'll want to keep the
set complete."

"Maybe you can help me with Goethe's German in return." She smiled, but
didn't answer.

"How about a coffee?"

She looked at her watch and said, "I have to go now, but...When will you
pick up the books?"

"It's Sunday tomorrow, so any time really."

"Twelve?"

"Fine, it's a date."

"Auf Wiedersehen, Lt. Jacks," she said and gave him her hand.

"Auf Wiedersehen, Frau Cornelius." He watched her walk away. Not the
Germanic type at all, he thought. Dark hair, petite, beautiful in her
way.

They met the next day at the book stall, he paid the remainder of the
money to the dealer, who wrapped the ten volumes in two packages. She
took one, he the other, and they walked off together. It was cold and
they were thankful for the warm gem√ºtlich caf√©. Jacks ordered brandy
with their coffee. She poured hers into the coffee and insisted that he
try it. He did. They stayed there over an hour. One thing led to
another. He asked her about her plans now in the west. She said that her
husband was thinking of joining the army if they would recognize his
commission. She had applied at several places as a secretary, but she
had the impression that there was a certain prejudice against people
from the east, so it wasn't easy. She also admitted that she was
thinking of leaving her husband. He was so, well, military. It wasn't
his fault really, but now that she was free, she wanted to be completely
so. After a half dozen brandies they went to a nearby hotel and spent
another hour there under the eiderdown. Jack had fallen -- hard. He
rented the room on Hamburger Allee and they met there almost every day
for a month. Then she disappeared.

That last day in their room on Hamburger Allee, Anneliese was especially
loving, sexually and, later, tenderly. Jacks felt tears on her cheeks,
but ascribed it to his love making technique which, if the truth be
told, was amateurish compared to hers. He was twenty-one, she twenty,
and he wondered if experience or natural talent had been her teacher --
but he didn't ask. The next day she didn't show, nor the next. He
noticed that both Goethe volumes, which they had begun reading together,
were gone. Her phone didn't answer and when he went to her apartment the
landlord told him that Herr and Frau Cornelius had moved out two days
ago, without leaving a forwarding address.

### 13

Buenos Aires, Argentina - February 1982

Marvin Jacks had bought a house in the town of Florida -- emphasis on
the "i" in Spanish -- a suburb of Buenos Aires. He was now the
International Air Transport Association's Director of Security and Fraud
Detection for the whole Western Hemisphere, but there was an Assistant
Director in Miami who handled most of the North American cases, and
reported to Jacks in Buenos Aires instead of directly to Head Office in
Geneva. Jacks had fought tooth and nail to avoid being moved to head
office, claiming he could do the job better in the field, which was
certainly true. Finally it came down to a duel between him and the
Finance Director, whose idea of efficiency was to move everyone to head
office and let them perform their miracles with modern communications
technology. Jacks finally won by getting the support of the president of
the national carrier, Argentine Airlines, a general who owed him a
favor. That particular officer is still in jail for human rights abuses,
so it wouldn't be politic to mention his name or the favor here. The
Director General of IATA personally overruled the Finance Director, whom
he hated, after receiving a telephone call from the general, during
which he, the general, said Marvin Jacks' continued presence in Buenos
Aires was essential to the survival of the airline industry -- or words
to that effect. Argentine generals are known to exaggerate.

Florida was originally settled by German immigrants at the beginning of
the twentieth century. The Second World War saw an influx of Germans,
war veterans who had no wish to live in a destroyed Germany, Nazis, a
few Socialists who had somehow survived the Third Reich, and some Jews
who couldn't get into Israel because of the British blockade. There had
been Jews among the original settlers, so it wasn't unnatural that these
post-concentration camp German Jews also inclined towards Florida,
although the majority settled in Buenos Aires itself.

All that didn't interest Marvin Jacks. He liked the place because it was
clean and, at the time, property was relatively cheap there. Most of his
time was spent traveling, but when he was in Buenos Aries at least he
had a quiet place to sleep and restful weekends with a swimming pool and
plenty of sun. Women occasionally served to assuage his solitude. They
were mostly airline employees, at that time still called stewardesses
rather than the politically correct "flight attendants", or the more
grounded airport personnel. None became permanent, perhaps because
Marvin Jacks wasn't permanent himself.

For public relations purposes airlines often gave cocktail parties, each
company at least once a year, which meant an average of two a month. As
the IATA representative, Jacks was always invited. Sometimes he went,
sometimes he didn't. He was also invited to lunch, something he couldn't
refuse, although such invitations were seldom repeated because he never
invited back. IATA had no budget for such things and he wasn't selling
anything anyway. The airline managers invited him in order to stay on
his good side and, if possible, to obtain information. They received
none, but Jacks did, and that was his main reason for accepting. The
food didn't interest him, it never did, but the wine, dessert and a good
after-lunch Cuban cigar made everything bearable.

And that brings us to Freddy Hussein. Freddy was the Lebanese General
Sales Agent for LAN Chile. An unusual position, because LAN had its own
ticket office and Chilean manager. Why, then, did they need a General
Sales Agent as well? GSAs normally existed when the airline didn't have
its own sales office. The reason, it was generally assumed, was that LAN
wanted Freddy because he was a good salesman, but couldn't very well
have a non-Chilean as manager. Marvin Jacks didn't buy that, but didn't
care because LAN was not an important player in the market. He wondered
though, how a Lebanese who didn't even speak Spanish could be a good
salesman in a Spanish-speaking country, and decided it had something to
do with politics. It didn't occur to him at first that Freddy Hussein
could be a spy. Although it should have, because Salvador Allende, the
socialist, was still the President of Chile.

Freddy often phoned Jacks asking for interpretations of IATA rules,
thereby admitting that he didn't know much about the business. He also
invited him to lunch every time he called. Jacks begged off with
invented excuses, something he couldn't do when an important airline
manager was doing the inviting. Finally, at an Air France cocktail
party, Freddy insisted so much that Jacks agreed.

There's an excellent German restaurant in Florida," he said. "Do you
like German food?"

Marvin Jacks didn't particularly like German food, pastries yes, but the
fact that Freddy Hussein was inviting him to lunch in Florida caused him
to put down his martini unfinished in order to be alert. Did Freddy know
he lived in Florida? He hadn't told any business associates, never gave
out his home telephone number. Before he could think of a reply though,
Freddy was telling him that he would pick him up at his office at
twelve-thirty the next day. "It's only fifteen minutes to Florida by
car," he said, as if Jacks didn't know. So maybe he wasn't aware that
Jacks lived there.

Next day the phone rang at 12:25. Freddy Hussein's secretary: "Mr.
Hussein is leaving now, Mr. Jacks. He asks if you can wait downstairs so
he won't lose time parking."

A chauffeur-driven Mercedes Benz. Freddy Hussein did okay for the GSA of
a third world airline. That was just one of the thoughts that ran
through Marvin Jacks' head as Freddy talked incessantly on the way to
the restaurant "Die Glocke" in Florida. The chauffeur dropped them off
at the entrance on Florida's main drag and disappeared. The restaurant
was small but well appointed. About ten tables, each with fresh, real
flowers in vases on them. An aging, white clad, bow-tied waiter with a
German accent greeted them at the door, Jacks in Spanish, then, to
Hussein in German: "So nice to see you again, Herr Hussein. I will tell
Frau Marie that you are here." He seated them at a corner table. Jacks'
instinct told him to keep his back to the wall, but the waiter was
holding the back-to-the-door chair for him. Freddy Hussein, it seemed,
had similar instincts. The waiter recommended *Eisbein*, the specialty
of the day, which Hussein accepted but Jacks passed on and selected
*Gr√ºne Sosse*, a Frankfurt specialty consisting of potatoes covered in
herb sauce.

Do you prefer German or Argentine wine, Mr. Jacks?" Hussein asked.

"Argentine, no contest."

Hussein laughed. "A wise choice."

"You speak German, Mr. Hussein?"

"Not really. Heinz greets all the guests in German, for atmosphere you
know, like the waiters in Italian restaurants always say Bon giorno.
Your Spanish seems excellent, I wish I could get the hang of it."

"Well, I've been here a long time."

"So I've heard," Hussein said. "Isn't that unusual? Foreign managers are
usually transferred on after a few years."

"Just fate I guess."

Hussein laughed his high-pitched, hyena laugh. "Fate, yes, a wonderful
concept. Do you think it exists?"

"I don't know, but at least it provides answers to the imponderables of
life."

"That's interesting. I've often wondered if what I do is really
determined by me or...well...fate. Did you ever ask yourself that
question, Mr. Jacks?"

Marvin Jacks had asked himself just that many times, but he wasn't about
to get personal with Freddy Hussein. "No," he said. Hussein looked up
from Jack's gaze and smiled: "Ah, Frau Marie." He jumped up and held out
the chair between him and Jacks, who stood up for the coming
introduction.

"Frau Marie, may I present my colleague, Mr. Marvin Jacks, a very
important person in the airline business." She turned her smile to Jacks
and it froze. Her hand was out to be shook but Jacks didn't take it
until Freddy Hussein, as an afterthought, said, "Mr. Jacks, this is Frau
Marie, the owner of this wonderful eatery and wife of the best chef in
Buenos Aires, which means of course in Argentina." Jacks took her hand,
but couldn't say a word, his head was whirling. Nor did she. "Please sit
with us a moment, Frau Marie," Hussein said. If he wondered why they
were staring at each other without a word, he may have attributed it to
hormonal fascination, for Frau Marie was indeed beautiful.

Hussein snapped his fingers for Heinz, the waiter, and asked him to
bring another wine glass, then, when it arrived, proposed a toast: "To a
meeting of cultures." Marvin Jacks and Frau Marie, once known as Judith
Baumgartner and somewhat later as Anneliese Cornelius, drank
considerably more than the traditional sip. Freddy Hussein was finding
it hard keeping up three sides of the conversation, so decided to force
participation. "Mr. Jacks is American but has been in Argentina a long
time, isn't it so, Mr. Jacks?"

"Yes, but not *so* long," Jacks mumbled.

"Oh? How long?" Frau Marie asked.

"Seven years."

"You must like it here then."

"One gets used to it. How about you?"

She smiled for the first time. "On and off. We came here fifteen years
ago, but those were difficult times, you know, so we went back to
Germany after a while. We earned some money there and came back with the
idea of opening a restaurant. And well, we did." It was like a script
she had often repeated.

"We?" Jacks said.

"My husband Karl-Heinz and I. He learned to cook in Germany."

As though on cue, Karl-Heinz appeared at their table and greeted them
with a slight bow in broken Spanish, and rushed back to the kitchen.
Jacks had seen Lt. Cornelius through the one-way interrogation-room
window at Camp King, but Cornelius, if he had ever seen Jacks at all, it
was only as another soldier walking around the camp. Jacks thought he
must have heard his name though.

Before the food arrived Freddy Hussein's chauffeur came rushing in and
said something to him in Arabic. "Oh, dear, isn't this awful," Hussein
said, standing up. "A crisis has arisen and I must go immediately. Most
unfortunate, my deepest apologies, Mr. Jacks. Frau Marie, could you be
so kind as to entertain my guest?" He scurried out. Jacks finished off
his second glass of wine and said, in German, "Okay, so what the hell is
going on, Anneliese?"

She said, in English, smiling: "Do you mind if I sit with you a while,
Mr. Jacks? It gives me an excuse to rest before the lunch crowd
arrives."

Jacks blinked. Games. "Sure, be my guest, Frau Marie." The waiter
appeared at his side and refilled the wine glasses. They raised their
glasses, staring into each other's eyes, German style.

"Argentine wine is really very good, the reds at least. It's a pity they
aren't better known outside the country."

"Organization," Jacks said. "You may have noticed that this country
isn't very well organized."

She smiled and was about to agree, but Jacks said, "not like Germany."

"Yes, that's true. Germany is a bit too organized for my taste."

"Is that why you're here?"

"Partly, yes."

"What's the other part?"

"My husband inherited a piece of land here and we came to see about it
and, well, we fell in love with the country."

"Convenient."

Her eyes frowned warning, but just for a moment, until she smiled again
and said, "Yes, fate can sometimes be convenient."

"But not always."

She laughed falsely, as though he had told the funniest joke of the day.
"Do you like philosophy, Mr. Jacks?"

"Not any more. I used to be an idealist, now I'm a na√Øve realist. How
about you?"

"Oh, it's all too deep for me. I prefer novels."

"Good, so do I. Too bad Goethe wrote so few of them"

Two middle-aged, straight-backed men entered and bowed towards them.
"Guten Tag," Frau Marie called to them and waved. Gradually the
restaurant was filling up. Jacks was served his gr√ºne Sosse and another
glass of wine.

"Actually, the Germans were very big in philosophy," Jacks said, "until
Marx at least."

"Marx just about finished off German philosophy, except possibly for
Rudolf Steiner, ever heard of him?"

"The name sounds familiar."

"There's a Rudolf Steiner School right here in Florida. Did you know
that? My daughter goes there."

"Oh yes, I know, about the school, that is."

"Do you have any children, Mr. Jacks?"

"No."

"You're not married?"

"No."

"How do you know about the school then?"

"A friend's kid goes there."

"Oh? What's his name? Maybe I know your friend."

"I don't think so. Please don't let me keep you from your duties, Frau
Marie," with ironic emphasis on her current name.

"Yes, I really must go now. We have excellent *Schwarzwaldtorte* for
dessert."

"Home made?"

"Yes...but not by me."

"In that case I'll pass. Could you just send the bill, please?"

"Mr. Hussein has taken care of it." She stood up. "We could advise you
when we have specials, Mr. Jacks, and German delicacies, made by me, if
you'll give me your phone number."

Jacks looked up at her and couldn't help thinking of Ingrid Bergman. He
hesitated, stood to be polite, then reached into his wallet and handed
her a business card. "I'll be leaving then."

"You haven't finished your lunch."

"Potatoes are filling." She offered her hand. "Should I kiss it?" he
asked.

"That would be out of character, wouldn't it?"

"Good bye, then." He turned and walked out before the old waiter could
hobble to the door to open it for him. Outside in the heat he felt like
fainting, but he walked like a man in a hurry down the street intending
to go home, shower and think. Hussein's chauffeur was calling him from
behind though. He stopped. "Mr. Hussein told me to wait for you, Se√±or."

"Give him my thanks, but I prefer to walk awhile."

"I can wait."

"No. Adios."

He walked past the street his house was on, circled around the block,
making sure he wasn't being followed, turned back and went home. Once
inside, he walked through the living room, ignoring the blinking
answering machine, shedding a piece of clothing in each room until he
was in the garden in the rear. He gazed into the water in the pool --
clear, limpid, uncomplicated, just how he wished his mind could be. As
he was about to dive in, a breeze arose rippling the water and brushing
aside the clarity. He dove naked into the irony. It refreshed him, but
didn't clear his confusion. He called his office and told his secretary
that he wasn't feeling well and wouldn't be there that afternoon, she
should let him know if anything urgent happened.

"Sorry, Marvin. Do you need anything?"

"No, Amalia, I'll be all right in the morning." Amalia would have loved
to take a taxi to Florida and tend to her boss at home. Some other time,
Jacks thought. He went to bed and, to his surprise, slept like a log.

At around four the phone rang. "Marvin, a woman called for you and when
I told her you weren't in she asked where she could contact you, that it
was urgent," Amalia said. "She was really insistent, as though it was a
matter of life and death -- so finally I said I'd ask you if I could
give her your number. Was that all right? She's going to call back
soon."

"What's her name?" Jacks said after his daytime memory returned and
wiped out an exciting dream forever.

"Mar√≠a Alem√°n is what she said."

"Did she have an accent?"

"A little bit, I think."

"Give her my number when she calls," Jacks said. "Thanks, Amalia."

"Okay. You all right, Marvin?"

"Yes, fine." He hung up.

It wasn't until five-thirty that Amalia called again. "She didn't call
back, Marvin. I have to go now."

"Any other calls?" Jacks asked, just to cover his disappointment.
"Nothing that can't wait."

"Okay, Amalia. See you tomorrow morning."

### 14

It may seem far-fetched to relate that these two people, Marvin Jacks
and Judith Baumgarten, a.k.a. Anneliese Cornelius and now, apparently,
Marie Alem√°n or, as we shall soon see, Clement, should meet again in
another, quite opposite part of the world. Much too fortuitous and
convenient for this story to be believed. Nevertheless, such things
happen more frequently than you'd expect. Marvin and the then Anneliese
were truly in love back in Germany when they were both very young. When
Anneliese seemingly disappeared from the face of the earth Marvin Jacks
was devastated. Anneliese perhaps (how can we know?) even more so. The
fact that they were living double lives spying on each other made them
both suspect that they had been found out, which bothered their mutual
consciences, although they were mistaken. Jacks had been ordered to keep
an eye on Anneliese just in case she was more than an innocent East
German refugee, and Anneliese, once her masters realized that Jacks was
attracted to her, had ordered her to keep him on a string, find out what
she could from him, even try to recruit him if it seemed possible. Now
they were afraid that it might be starting all over again.

Anneliese, now Frau Marie, saw it coming as soon as she saw him, for she
had been expecting Freddy Hussein to bring an American airline official
to lunch in order to seduce him. Motive? They suspected he was CIA, at
least Freddy Hussein had a hunch that he was. He couldn't believe that
an American who spoke three languages (he'd found out from the Lufthansa
manager that Jacks spoke German), living in Argentina and flying around
Latin America and other parts of the world in a job that seemed, to him,
without tangible objectives, could be only what he claimed to be. The
job could therefore be a cover. If he was right it would be a feather in
his cap; if he was wrong...well...what did he have to lose? Certainly
not Frau Marie's virginity.

Marvin Jacks didn't see it coming until he received a phone call the
next morning from John Armstrong, the Panam manager, who asked him to
stop by his office at his convenience, which usually meant asap. Such
calls were routine and were almost always motivated by an airline
manager wanting to complain to Jacks about a competitor giving discounts
or ask for his interpretation of an IATA rule, although the
interpretation could usually be handled by phone, so Jacks expected the
former reason. He was reluctant to leave the office and possibly miss
another call from Frau Marie, but couldn't stall Armstrong, at least not
in good conscience, so he told him he'd be right over. Panam was, after
all, one of the most important airlines in the market. He told his
secretary he'd be back in an hour.

Armstrong ushered him into his office, had him sit in one of the leather
easy chairs in the corner near the large window overlooking the Rio de
la Plata, and offered him Colombian coffee and a Cuban cigar. Jacks
accepted the coffee, passed on the cigar. He knew the corner was
reserved for government ministers, important travel agents and clients.
So Armstrong wanted something, otherwise Jacks would be sitting across
from him at his desk. He was a tall, thin man with a receding widow's
peak and hooked nose. His clothes had obviously been bought in the U.S.
-- loafers, pants not quite touching his shoe tops, button-down collar
on a white shirt, regimental-stripe silk tie.

"Marvin, we've known each other a long time now," he began. "How long
has it been? Years. And we've grown to respect each other as honorable
men, Americans to the core." Jacks was immediately wary. He remembered
how a few years earlier a Latvian friend who also lived in Argentina had
confided to him that he once did some work for the CIA, and that
Armstrong was his handler. The friend was rabidly anti-Soviet, as were
all √©migr√©s from the Baltic countries, so the CIA had no hesitation in
recruiting them. They paid him a hundred dollars a month to "keep his
ears open". He accepted the money for six months but never heard
anything to report, so his employment was terminated. Jacks had
forgotten about it, and was never sure if it was true anyway

"So I'm going to tell you something now in strict confidentiality,"
Armstrong continued. "Can I depend on your keeping this to yourself?"
IATA's policy was never to divulge the name of the complaining airline
when information was given about a competitor\'s misdeeds. Armstrong
knew this, so Jacks decided it was something else. But he said anyway,
"You know our policy, John. That's not a problem."

"This has nothing to do with business, Marvin." He opened an ivory
inlaid cigarette box and offered it to Jacks, knowing he didn't smoke
cigarettes. Jacks shook his head, and took his pipe from a side pocket
of his suit jacket. The pocket was strewn with loose tobacco and ashes,
which he made a mental note to empty once outside. He took a tobacco
pouch from another pocket, filled the pipe and lighted it with a Zippo.
They blew smoke at each other and waited to see who would blink. It was
Armstrong.

"Can I, Marvin?"

"I have to know what it is first, John. I'm sure you can understand
that."

"Yes, I can." He sighed histrionically. "Okay, I know I can trust you
Marvin, so here goes." He took a deep drag on his cigar, let the smoke
out from his nose and said, "I lead a double life, Marvin. You see, I
also work for our government." He waited. Jacks had to say something.

"I see. In what capacity?"

"Central Intelligence Agency."

If he'd expected Jacks to fall over in astonishment, he was mistaken.
Instead Jacks said, "Good for you, but what's that got to do with me?"

"A lot, Marvin. We want you to help us."

"Are you trying to recruit me, John?"

Armstrong laughed as though he were enjoying the repartee, which he
wasn't. "Not exactly...or in a sense yes, but just for one
case...although if you were interested after that, well, who knows?"
Jacks started to say something, but Armstrong wasn't finished. "You will
be paid for your time of course...and, Marvin, that's the first thing I
would like you to keep secret -- my association with the Agency."

"Sure, no problem."

"Good. Thanks. I know you were in military intelligence in the army and
had a distinguished record."

"That's news to me," Jacks said.

"That you were in M.I.?" Armstrong said, frowning, suddenly awake to the
possibility that they'd checked the wrong man.

"No, that I had a distinguished record. Didn't do anything distinguished
that I can remember."

"Well, let's just say that your record is clean, that you were in
interrogation, then special ops, meaning sending spies -- I think you
call them "sources" in the army -- into East Germany, and debriefing
them afterward. Right?"

"Something like that," Jacks replied, thinking back to those times and,
inevitably, Anneliese.

"I love that answer, Marvin. It shows reserve and a sense of
confidentiality even now."

This guy is too much, Jacks thought. Why don't I politely tell him to
fuck off and get the hell out of here. "Not much to be confidential
about," he said though, wanting to keep his options open while he
pondered the alternatives. "We couldn't find a gas mask in a gas mask
store."

"A gas mask?"

"Somehow the C.O. got information -- probably from the Pentagon -- that
the Russians had a new gas mask that had been distributed to their
troops in East Germany. So we were given the job of getting one. Why?
Because it was there, I guess, like a mountain." His pipe had gone out
as it often did when he was talking, so he re-lighted it.

"So what happened?" Armstrong asked. "Did you get it?"

Jacks laughed. "No, we tried for over a year, until I left at least.
Maybe they're still trying." He was curious about what they wanted him
to do and that was so important that they checked his army record before
even asking if he was open to the possibility. He decided to play it
cool.

"I don't know, John. I've had enough of that stuff, I think."

Armstrong saw the opening in the last two words. "And I think you think
wrong. It gets into your blood, man. We all know that.

Curiosity turned to apprehension and his heart jumped. Could this have
something to do with Anneliese? Armstrong was wrong about his blood
though. He had really had enough of the cloak and dagger circus and,
most of all, the people involved who seemed to like it. But...

"What do you want me to do?"

Armstrong slapped him on the knee. "Atta boy, I knew you were a
patriot."

"Wait a minute, John," Jacks said. "I only asked you what you want. I
didn't say I'd do it. First of all, why did you think of me?"

"Right, Marvin, I'll open up -- totally. You were seen going into a
restaurant in Florida" -- he opened a pocket notebook: "Die Glocke --
the other day with Freddy Hussein. Tuesday as a matter of fact, at
twelve-thirty hours. Hussein left at twelve-forty five, alone, and you
left at thirteen-fifteen, also alone. You went into a house there in
Florida via a circuitous route, walking. You had the key. Is that
right?"

"Sounds right, so what?"

"Could you tell me why?"

"Why what?"

"Why you went to that particular restaurant with Hussein."

"What the hell is this, an interrogation? Should I call my lawyer? Why
were you following me?"

Armstrong smiled, having expected this kind of reaction. "No, Marvin,"
he said, "it isn't an interrogation. But you asked me why we thought of
you. And we weren't following you. We were following Freddy Hussein."

Jacks thought a moment, but he had already decided that he'd have to
find out what was going on. "Okay, I was there with Hussein because he
invited me for lunch. In fact he'd invited me several times, and I
always gave some excuse. He's a pest, you know. So finally this time I
thought I'd get it over with. He picked me up at my office in his car
and we drove to Florida. He said he knew a great German restaurant
there. I didn't have much choice."

"What about the house?"

"In Florida? I live there."

"You live in Florida?"

"Yeah, anything wrong with that?"

"No, of course not. But you have no family -- as far as I know -- so I
expected you'd live in an apartment in the Calle Florida in town rather
than in a suburb."

"I like it there."

"Sure," Armstrong said, smiling falsely again. "No offense meant. Why
did Hussein leave before you, and quite early?"

"His chauffeur came in and told him something in Arabic, some kind of
emergency I guess, so Freddy said he had to leave, apologies, etcetera."
Jacks wondered if the conversation was being recorded. He guessed it
was. So far he'd told Armstrong nothing but the truth.

"Uh huh." Armstrong looked down at his notebook. "Did anything happen in
the restaurant?"

"Like what?"

"Like anything. Did you talk to anyone?"

"Only the owner, a Frau Marie."

"Marie Clement, wife of Karl-Heinz Clement. He's the cook. What did you
and Frau Marie talk about?"

"Small talk, nothing." There goes the truth, he thought.

"Small talk isn't nothing, Marvin. Think."

"She was sort of filling in for Hussein after he left. I don't know, she
asked me what airline I was with, and I explained IATA to her. She told
me this was the second time they'd been to Argentina, that she loved it
but everything was complicated. The usual. Oh, that she's from Hamburg I
think she said."

"Anything else?"

"No, some people came in and she went to butter them up, seems like a
good hostess. Now what's this about, John?"

"Just one more question first. Why did you take the long way home?"

"I wanted to walk off the meal. I was very tired and decided to take the
afternoon off. Don't tell my boss."

Armstrong laughed as though it were the best joke of the season. "Don't
worry, I wouldn't think of it," he said. "Now, what this is all about."
He paused for effect, and looked Jacks in the eye for too long. "Freddy
Hussein is a spy."

"Doesn't surprise me," Jacks said. "For whom?"

"We're not sure, probably one of the East European intelligence
services."

"Too dumb for the Soviets?"

"Maybe."

"How do you know?"

"We know."

"Okay."

"He goes frequently to Die Glocke, seems to know the Clements well,
which makes us suspicious of them as well."

"Any other reason to suspect them?" Jacks asked.

"Not really. Oh yes, according to one of our German sources she talks
more like an easterner than a Hamburger" -- he smiled gloomily at the
little joke -- "from Berlin perhaps."

"Maybe she was originally from Berlin and moved to Hamburg."

"Possibly. That's about all we know, but we'd like to know more. That's
why I'm asking you to help us."

"How could I help?" Jacks asked.

"Freddy Hussein takes you to Die Glocke. He didn't know you live in
Florida, right?"

"Right."

"I wonder why. Any ideas?"

"He said the food was great."

"Was it?"

"Well, it's probably the only restaurant in Argentina where you can get
*gr√ºne Sosse*."

"What's that?"

"A German dish," Jacks replied. "The food's good there, but I'm not a
gourmet."

"He doesn't have to go to Florida for good food, does he?"

"Why then?"

"You're American, you have good contacts in the airline business, the
police, probably even S.I.D.E., a mysterious job. Why not try to recruit
you? Or maybe you're already one of us. Why not try to find out? If so,
even better, try and turn you around."

"How?"

"I understand that Frau Marie is a very attractive, interesting woman."

Jacks was surprised; he didn't have to pretend. "Do you have any facts
that lead you to such a conclusion, John, or is your imagination getting
the better of you?"

"Why else would Hussein bring you out to Florida for lunch, introduce
you to Marie Clements and disappear with a silly excuse? You tell me."

Jacks' pipe had gone out, so he lighted it again. Considering what he
knew about the lady now known as Marie Clements, Armstrong was probably
right.

"By the way, Marvin," Armstrong said, "you might be out of a job soon,
so that's more reason to consider \..."

"Why's that?"

I received a telex from New York just before you walked in. Didn't have
much time to think about it, but it doesn't look good. It seems the U.S.
CAB has revoked IATA's anti-trust immunity -- or is about to; the
wording isn't too clear.

Jacks and Armstrong stared at each other. It meant that the airlines
could no longer set fares among themselves under the umbrella of IATA's
anti-trust immunity. "Damn fools," Jacks finally said.

"The CAB?"

"They're political, fools or not. I mean the airlines. Anyone in the
business with any sense could see this coming. But what did we do?
Nothing."

"What could we have done?"

"Bring the consumers -- passengers and air freight shippers -- into the
process. I recommended it a year ago."

"But no one listened?"

"They listened, but thought the European governments could pressure the
United States not to go that route. They didn't realize that the U.S.
couldn't care less what anyone else thinks. It's gonna be dog eat dog
now, John." He was thinking that he probably had enough on his platter
with security and fraud detection to keep working without tariff
compliance. Panam, and John Armstrong with it, on the other hand was in
deep trouble. Was it possible that they didn't realize it yet?

"Yeah, well, back to Frau Marie," Armstrong said. "We'd like you to
contact her again somehow and try to see what she's up to."

"If anything."

"Right, if anything. What do you say, Marvin?"

Marvin Jacks knew his answer would be yes, but he also knew how to play
the game. "Let me sleep on it, John," he said.

"One night?"

"Yeah, I'll let you know tomorrow."

15

"Madelaine Albrecht, IATA Geneva," Jacks' secretary, Amalia, called to
him with her hand over her receiver. Their offices were so small that
they only used the intercom system when someone from outside was
present.

"Madelaine Albrecht -- who the hell is that?" Jacks mumbled to himself
as he picked up his phone. She spoke in English with a Swiss accent, but
he recognized her anyway. "Good morning, Marvin. I'm arriving tomorrow
morning on Swissair. Please don't pick me up, Argentine Airlines insists
on having that honor."

Think fast, Marvin. "Fine, Madelaine, the Swiss get up too early for me
anyway. What time and where should we meet?"

"Midday will be fine, I sleep badly on airplanes. You did make the hotel
reservation for me I hope. Sheraton, wasn't it?"

"Of course."

"Call me before you come in case I'm still asleep -- and don't forget to
bring the pertinent files with you. We can have lunch in my room."

"Even though it's all in my head?"

"Yes, Marvin, even if it's all in your head."

"Have a good flight, Madelaine. See you tomorrow."

"Noonish."

"Right."

She thinks my phone is tapped, Jacks thought. And if it is, whoever is
listening didn't hear any hotel reservation being made. "Amalia," he
called, "make a reservation for Mrs. Madelaine Albrecht at the Sheraton,
in tomorrow for one night. IATA discount. I forgot all about it.

"Who is she, Marvin?"

"Some new consultant working with the Human Resources Director. The
usual bullshit."

"What usual bullshit?"

"Never mind. Just make the reservation -- and get the room number."

### 16

Dawn had finally arrived. Streaks of light probed stealthily through the
room, hurried under chairs and tables like a spy with little time left.
Marvin Jacks had hardly slept, so he was sitting in the dining room
drinking his third coffee, thinking hard and getting nowhere or
somewhere, he couldn't decide which. One: Anneliese/Marie was playing it
very cloak and dagger, pretending on the telephone to be someone from
IATA Geneva. It was good, but not very. If someone wanted to check it
would be easy to find out that no such person existed. But they'd have
to be suspicious first, and why should they be. Two: the CIA, in the
person of John Armstrong, was suspicious of her. Three: Marvin Jacks was
also suspicious. Conclusion: she's still a spy for the German Democratic
Republic. Big question: Was the rendezvous with him today at the
Sheraton part of her clandestine duties, or was all the caution because
it was above and beyond duty? No answer. Four: Was Marvin Jacks still in
love with her? His head told him he better not be; his heart chuckled
and told the truth, for better or for worse. He was. Five: Was she still
in love with him, or, more accurately, was she ever? No answer. Six: Did
John Armstrong know more than he told Jacks? No answer, but probably
not. Seven: How should he answer Armstrong's offer to work for the CIA
in order to find out about Anneliese? The answer would have to wait
until after his meeting with her this afternoon.

Jacks had been writing it all down on a piece of paper like a
question-answer quiz. The result was more questions than answers, but at
least now he knew what they were. He held a match to the paper and let
the ashes fall into an ashtray. His head leaned slowly onto his chest
and his eyes closed. At nine o'clock the phone rang. Jacks shook his
head to get his bearings and answered on the fifth ring. "Marvin,"
Amalia said, "are you okay?"

"Basically yes," he answered. "Slight headache, that's all."

"Mr. Armstrong of Panam already called twice. I told him you should be
in any minute. He wants you to call him urgently."

"If he calls again tell him that I had to go to...uh...Montevideo and
that I'll probably be back late this afternoon."

"Really, Marvin?"

"Sure. Just tell him that, Amalia."

"I could say you're sick."

"Tell him what I just told you, it's true," Jacks insisted, thinking
about the possibility that the phones were tapped. He hung up and turned
on the answering machine in case Armstrong got hold of his unlisted home
number, which wouldn't be difficult. He had breakfast, showered,
dressed, put Mozart on and went to his bookcase to select a book and
kill time. To his own surprise he chose Plato over John Le Carr√©.

For I am quite ready to admit, Simmias and Cebes, that I ought to be
grieved at death, if I were not persuaded in the first place that I am
going to other gods who are wise and good (of which I am as certain as I
can be of any such matters), and secondly (though I am not so sure of
this last) to men departed, better than those whom I leave behind; and
therefore I do not grieve as I might have done, for I have good hope
that there is yet something remaining for the dead, and as has been said
of old, some far better thing for the good than for the evil.

"Socrates was an optimist, Plato," Jacks said to himself. Having lived
alone most of his life he had gotten into the habit of addressing
authors out loud. "Or are you the optimist and Socrates just your
fictional mouthpiece?" If so you did a good job. Know why? Because we'll
never know." He straightened his tie and put on his suit jacket, then
checked his appearance in the bathroom mirror. "How do I look, mirror,
mirror on the wall? Good enough for whatever her name is?" He thought of
shaving off his beard, which was showing signs of gray, to make himself
look younger, then cursed himself for an idiot, slammed the bathroom
door as well as the outside door and climbed into his red Mitsubishi. If
it's possible to tell a person's character by the car he owns, Marvin
Jacks would be pegged as a practical traditionalist, which wouldn't be
far from wrong.

He parked in his usual place, a parking lot around the corner from the
office. "Little late today, Se√±or Hacks?" the attendant commented.

"Time is relative, Pedro. I could be early." Pedro frowned at that.
Then, as Jacks was walking out, he said, "Mr. Hacks, a question."

"What is it, Pedro?"

"You have a moment?" Jacks looked at his watch. He had more than a
moment. "Sure."

"Well, you know the Banco de la Naci√≥n he is paying almost fifty percent
interest on what you call them...time deposits?"

"Yes, so?"

"I have some money saved, and I was thinking maybe...maybe I should put
it in the Banco and then I have a lot more. What do you think?"

"I think it's a big risk, Pedro."

"Risk? Why? It's in dollars."

"They're paying such high interest rates because no one wants to put
their money there at normal rates. Fifty percent is for three months,
the yearly rate is a hundred and eighty percent." Pedro frowned harder.
He didn't understand.

"But that is the Banco de la Naci√≥n, Se√±or Hacks."

"Uh, huh, and who is the president of the Naci√≥n? Never mind. Look, you
might make some money on it, all I'm saying is that it's a risk.
*Entiende*?"

"*S√≠ se√±or, muchas gracias*."

Thousands of people are putting their miserable little hoards in the
bank, Jacks thought as he walked down Florida Street towards Retiro, the
central train terminal. The big money is already out, moved to Miami or
Zurich. If the Argentine treasury doesn't go broke in thirty days and
Pedro takes his double or nothing out then, he wins. If not he loses
big, not much money, but all he has.

Retiro terminal is located directly across from the ex-*Plaza de los
Ingleses*, now the *Plaza de las Fuerzas Armadas*, on the other side of
which is the imposing steel and glass slab known as the Buenos Aires
Sheraton. Why did she choose the Sheraton of all places? Jacks wondered.
Maybe because of its proximity to Retiro. If she took the train to town
she'd have only to cross the plaza and enter the hotel. Less chance of
meeting people she knows. Could be that simple. It's also where an IATA
person would go. Would she know that? He walked into the terminal, a
huge European style structure. It reminded him of the Milan terminal,
the same people running about like ants. He shrugged, lit his pipe and
went to the terminal's caf√©. He sat by a large window facing the
bustling exhaust-filled street with a direct view across the plaza to
the Sheraton. It was too far away to identify anyone entering, but he
would certainly recognize her leaving the terminal and crossing the
plaza.

Jacks' mind had wandered back to Frankfurt and their room on Hamburger
Allee, where they made love every day for a month before she
disappeared, simply didn't show up, and neither he, the German police,
nor M.I. had been able to find her or her husband. He finished his
breakfast of croissants -- called *medialunas*, half-moons, in Argentina
-- juice and coffee, and concentrated more on the stream of people
coming from the terminal and passing by his window. Because of the
dirty-blond wig and sunglasses, he almost missed her. But he recognized
her walk, something lopsided about it. He remembered her mentioning that
one leg was a little shorter than the other. She didn't cross to the
park, but kept on the street parallel to it, waited with the crowd at
the red light, crossed and headed up the hill towards Avenida Santa Fe,
Buenos Aires's main shopping street. Must be going on a roundabout route
through the crowds in order to double back to the hotel, Jacks thought.
Jesus, is she being careful, wig and all. He looked at the large clock
on the opposite wall, and checked it with his watch: eleven o'clock. She
said noonish, okay he'd give her an hour, then go to the Sheraton to see
if she'd checked in yet. A perfectly normal question for him to ask
about his colleague. She had no baggage though. How would she explain
that? Well, she's not dumb, that's for sure. Of course, she couldn't
just walk in, she'd have to come by taxi, so she probably went to pick
up a suitcase somewhere, then take a taxi back to the hotel.

Jacks paid for his breakfast and went into the terminal proper and
walked through it slowly against the flow of arriving passengers. The
flow would begin to move in the opposite direction after seven o'clock
in the evening. It occurred to him that it was remarkable how one could
walk through a crowd of moving bodies without bumping into any of them.
Some kind of inner radar must be functioning. He had the sensation that
he was inside his body instead of being a unity of outside-inside. "He",
Jacks, was like a pilot in the cockpit of his head and his body was on
automatic, threading itself through darting obstacles, avoiding crashes.
He, his "I", was merely an observer. He felt he could have risen to the
high arched terminal ceiling and continue watching from there if he
willed it enough. But he didn't try; he stayed inside his head. Then
Anneliese re-entered his thoughts, not Frau Marie, but the younger
Anneliese from the Frankfurt time, and his state of self-awareness
popped. He looked up at the huge terminal clock which, however, wasn't
working, as usual. His watch read twelve o'clock. He had been wandering
back and forth in the terminal for almost an hour.

It struck him as he was leaving the terminal that he didn't have his
attach√©-case. Damn, he was supposed to be bringing some papers. Was it
important? Only if his phone was tapped and he was being followed.
Cursing himself for paranoid, he decided to go to the office and pick up
his attach√©-case and play the role to the hilt. It would only take
fifteen minutes.

"Mr. Armstrong called again, Marvin," Amalia said when he walked in. "I
told him you were in Montevideo."

Jacks opened the file cabinet in Amalia's office and took out the file
marked "Admin-expenses", knowing that she would check on which file he
took and that one was as good as any. "Be back later."

"Mrs. Albrecht also called -- about ten minutes ago." Jacks turned and
stared at her. "She said she was in the Sheraton, room..." she looked at
a note paper on her desk "...712, and that she's expecting you."

Jacks left without acknowledging the message. He walked across the Plaza
San Martin without looking at the huge iron statue of the Great
Liberator pointing west on its pedestal. He walked through the hotel's
lobby, which could have been in any country in the world, to the
elevators and pressed the button for the seventh floor.

He had it all rehearsed, what he was going to say to her, and how. All
right, Anneliese, what's this all about? For starters. He'd just stand
there with his hands in his pockets, one hand anyway, the other holding
the file. Cold, cool, the offended party. But it didn't work out that
way. She opened the door to room 712 and stepped back. The blond wig was
off and her black hair fell to her shoulders. One hand was on her right
hip. At first she looked as though she'd rehearsed the same attitude he
had. Her hand dropped from her hip, his hand left his pocket and the
other dropped the file. They stepped forward and fell into each other's
arms. He couldn't help himself and he guessed she couldn't either,
although he wasn't so sure of that. They stood that way for at least a
minute, then he reached under the back of her legs and carried her to
the bed. She had gained some weight but was still slight. He laid her on
the bed and lay down alongside her. After a while she got up and went
into the bathroom. He could hear the water running in the sink. When she
came out she was naked. Jacks stood up and started to undress, she
helped, unbuttoning his shirt carefully, smiling now, then she pulled
down the bed cover and climbed under the sheet. They both remembered
that little room years ago on Hamburger Allee in Frankfurt.

Afterwards they fell asleep, exhausted not only from the love-making,
but also from the events of the past two days. The telephone woke them.
Jacks looked at his watch, it was five o'clock. "Don't answer it," he
told her. "It must be my secretary." She went into the bathroom, turned
on the shower, came out again and took his hand. They used to shower
together in Frankfurt. It was like returning to a previous life, the
water pouring down on them as they soaped each other with caressing
hands. She giggled when an erection arose as she soaped his penis, then
she mumbled something in German that he didn't get, shook her head and
let cold water run on it till it subsided.

They were dressed again, sitting across from each other in armchairs,
sipping from a bottle of excellent Argentine wine from the minibar, both
waiting for the other to begin the conversation they dreaded.

### 17

Jacks sighed: "Okay, Anneliese, or Frau Marie, what's going on?" He
tried to smile so it wouldn't seem too much like an interrogation, but
interrogators smile, too.

"Where do you want me to start, Marvin?"

"From the beginning, I guess." The revelation that she and her husband
were East German spies posing as refugees when they first met in
Frankfurt didn't surprise him. She also said that during their
short-lived affair both her husband and their handler knew about it and
her mission was to get information from him and, if possible, to turn
him, that is, to recruit him as a double agent. She fell in love with
him though -- an occupational hazard, it seems -- and didn't know what
to do until the situation resolved itself through instructions from
Berlin to go to Hamburg with a new identity, identities that is, for her
husband and herself. Jacks interrupted to ask if her marriage was real
or part of her cover. She said both, that it was cover, but had to be
real in order to be convincing. But that she hadn't even known Cornelius
until they were ordered to marry. Her daughter was the fruit of the
marriage but, she insisted, she still loved Jacks and even the child had
originally been part of the cover. She was in tears now, so Jacks waited
for her to recover, or seem to, before asking how Argentina came into
the picture.

"It was 1973, when Per√≥n returned to Argentina," she said. "It was chaos
here and they -- Wolff, the Stasi chief, I mean -- wanted us to come and
help the leftist groups, you know, the revolution. In Berlin, and Moscow
too probably, they thought Argentina might be ripe, probably because Che
Guevara was Argentine, I don't know."

"Seems vague," Jacks said.

"Isn't it always? We were also to establish an identity here and
eventually emigrate to the United States."

"Ah, and it didn't work?"

"It worked, but they wanted us back in Germany for something else, so we
went and then returned to Argentina three years ago."

Jacks was wary, not sure why she was telling him all this, or even if it
was the truth; but he wanted to believe her. If you can't believe the
one you love, you can't believe anyone. "With the same identity?" he
asked.

"Yes, we still had our National Identity Cards, which never expire."

"And the same mission?"

"Essentially yes, but now I know that the revolution cannot succeed
here, so I at least help people who are wanted by the police and armed
forces escape, get out of the country."

She foraged in her handbag and came up with a crumpled package of local
cigarettes, black tobacco. Jacks checked his pocket for a lighter, but
couldn't find it. She found a box of matches in the bag, offered him a
cigarette, which he declined, and lit up. She held the cigarette as she
always had, between her thumb and index finger, like a dubious insect.

"You mean the ERP people?" ERP meant *Ej√©rcito Revolucionario del
Pueblo*, a Marxist group which had started by hijacking trucks carrying
food and clothing, and distributing it to the poor. Then they decided
they needed money, so robbed banks and kidnapped people for ransom. They
also killed some generals, which was definitely a no-no. After the
military coup the generals began a campaign to wipe out all resistance.
They didn't bother with concentration camps, they just murdered everyone
even suspected of having a connection with the insurgents. This finally
caused a reverse migration to Europe, mostly to Spain and Italy, not
only of insurgents and their friends, but also journalists, scientists,
teachers, psychologists, even some Catholic priests after six of their
colleagues were murdered and they realized that the Church hierarchy not
only would do nothing to defend them, but acquiesced in the state
terror. As Anneliese and Jacks sat talking in the Sheraton, that
cleansing "proceso", as they called it, was in full swing.

"For example, yes," she said, "the ERP people."

"That's very dangerous, Anne...er..what *is* your name, by the way?"

"Call me Marie so you won't slip when someone is around. And I know it's
dangerous, yes, I know."

"But your real name?"

"Judith. Judith Baumgartner."

"Oh." A long pause while Jacks searched in his pocket for his pipe and
tobacco and tried to think of what to say next. She beat him too it.

"What about you, Marvin? You are Marvin, aren't you?"

"Yes, yes I am."

"Really not married?"

"Well, legally yes, still, but it's over, she's in Switzerland."

"Swiss?"

"No, Argentine, it's a long story."

"Any children?"

"No."

She sighed as if relieved by one complication less. Then: "We're quite
safe though. My husband's name is Clement now, a native Argentine who
emigrated to Germany as a very young child, and has now returned with
his German bride. Very romantic, but all in order, papers and everything
-- and it explains his accent. He even learned to be a cook.

"You're not as safe as you think, Judith." He used her name consciously;
he had to have something real. She didn't object.

"What do you mean?"

"Yesterday...no, back in Frankfurt I was also spying on you. They
suspected you, at least one sergeant did, so I was assigned to
accidentally meet you off duty and try to find out." He thought she'd be
shocked, but she only blew a smoke ring and said, smiling, "I knew."

"You mean you guessed."

"In this game guessing is as good as knowing, darling. You were very
obvious."

"But I really fell in love with you," he protested.

"I knew that, too. Give me your hand." she held it in both of hers and
kissed it. "I fell in love with you, too, Marvin, and I've never loved
anyone else." Their knees were touching and she kissed his hand again.
Tears came to his eyes, but he held them back. He didn't know what to
do, or even to believe her, that was the worst part.

"I didn't tell them about the room on Hamburger Allee though...but then
you disappeared."

"Yes, we were ordered to Hamburg to support the *Rote Armee Faktion*,
but I don't want to talk about that. I couldn't tell you I was a spy, it
was impossible, but I was so sorry." At that moment Jacks made up his
mind to believe her, a leap of faith.

"Okay, anyway a guy from the CIA contacted me yesterday." Her eyes
opened wider, very attentive now. "They suspect you, Judith."

"But how?"

"Freddy Hussein, they seem to know a lot about him and they've been
following him. They saw me go with him to your restaurant the other day
and they know he's been there often."

"Damn!, I knew that guy was trouble, a complete idiot."

"Yeah, well, that's why they talked to me, want me to find out what he
-- and you -- are up to. It's dangerous, Judith, all they have to do is
tip off the Argentine S.I.D.E., who know how to get everything you know
from you, and then 'disappear' you afterwards."

She sat there staring at her hands which rested between her legs.
Finally, "I know," she said, "but I don't know what to do."

"I've been thinking about it," Jacks said, "and I see two
possibilities."

Her eyes asked him what they were.

"Go over to the CIA, ask for protection in exchange for information. I
could arrange that." She didn't say anything, waiting for the second
choice.

"Or," he said, "leave the country, escape."

She smiled. "They both sound so easy, Marvin, but I don't think they
are."

"I didn't say they'd be easy, but let's examine them anyway. First, the
CIA..."

"They would certainly want more than information," she said, without the
smile. "They'd want me to be a double agent, and I'm not prepared to do
that -- or do you think I should? Never mind. And I wouldn't want to
give them information either. I'm not a traitor, Marvin."

"This is different, Judith. You must know by now that the German
Democratic Republic is a corrupt satellite of the Soviet Union, and
sooner or later it's going down the drain. Thousands have defected to
the west. Why not you?"

"I...I don't know. I'm not just someone, one of the thousands, I'm a
professional spy for God's sake, Marvin."

"Okay, let's just look at the second alternative for a moment."

"Escape? Where would I go? And Micaela?"

"Micaela?"

"My daughter."

"Oh, well, she'd go with you of course, to Mexico and finally across the
border to the States -- for example. There are other possibilities I'm
sure."

"They'd find me, Marvin. I know too much."

"Not if the CIA gives you a new identity and takes care of you there. I
can talk to them, Judith, say you definitely won't be a double agent,
but you'll tell them all you know in exchange for getting out, new
identity and protection. I can at least ask."

She smiled at his naivet√©, which wasn't really that, just grasping at
straws. "That would be telling them what I am. They may suspect now, but
they don't know."

He took one of her cigarettes, started to light it, threw it down and
tried to relight his pipe. She leaned forward and took his hand. "Let me
think, *Liebling*, I need to think. Now I must go. Don't call or come to
the restaurant. I'll contact you. She stood up. *Ich liebe dich,
Marvin*."

"I love you too, Judith, and..." She held her hand up, palm out like a
policeman directing traffic, and said, "Don't get up."

"The room is still available," he said. "Can you come back?" She shook
her head, turned and walked out the door.

He waited until the next morning to pay the hotel bill, pretending that
Ms. Albrecht of IATA had stayed the night.

### 18

The next morning Marvin Jacks received a telex from his boss Ian Payne
telling him to go to Geneva right away for an important meeting. Judith
had said not to call her, that she'd contact him. She was right of
course, so all he could do was tell his secretary that if Ms Alem√°n
called to tell that he had to leave on a business trip and would be back
in a few days.

When he did return Amalia gave him a list of calls: airline managers
mostly, including Armstrong of Panam, a few personal ones, but no
Alem√°n. Maybe she didn't identify herself. He asked Amalia if anyone had
called without giving their name. His secretary thought a moment, then
said no, not that she could remember. "Only a guy name of Rodriguez who
wouldn't say what he wanted. Said he'd call back. Do you want me to call
anyone now, Marvin?" He shook his head. "Dictation?" He always dictated
a report on his return from trips. He shook his head again, went into
his office and when he was about to close the door she asked, "*mate
cocido*?" -- the bitter tea she knew Marvin liked. "Yes, thanks,
Amalia."

There was a knock on the door -- three times, with determination. "I'll
go," Jacks said. He looked through the peephole, one was careful those
days because of the kidnappings. A short man stood in the hall in a
rumpled suit under an open trench coat, cigarette dangling from his lips
a la Bogart, only lacking the fedora. He seemed to be alone. "S√≠?" Jacks
called through an intercom. The man looked around for a microphone.
"Just speak up, I'll hear you," Jacks said. The man took a wallet from
his breast pocket, flipped it open and held it up to the peephole.
"Rodriguez, S.I.D.E." The Argentine state intelligence service. Jacks
swore to himself and opened the door. "Sr. Hacks?" the man asked. He
actually looked a little like Bogart, but his voice was more Peter
Lorre.

"Yes. What can I do for you?"

"May I come in? I'd like to ask you some questions."

Once in Jacks' office, he closed the door, much to Amalia's
disappointment.

"You are an investigator for the IATA?" Rodriguez said, something he
obviously already knew.

"Yes," Jacks replied, "And you are one for the S.I.D.E.?"

"Yes," Rodriguez smiled, "so in a way we are colleagues, except for pay
scale."

Jacks smiled back, doubting that Rodriguez depended on his salary alone.
"Would you like a mate cocido?

"Yes, thank you."

"Amalia, two mate cocidos," Jacks called out, letting Rodriguez know
that the door was thin.

"S√≠, se√±or," she called back.

"You are of course wondering why I am here, Mr. Hacks." Jacks often had
visits from police detectives investigating travel agency rip-offs or
airline security, but this was the first time a S.I.D.E investigator had
wanted to see him, so he was curious -- and nervous. During the course
of the past month he had become involved with STASI, CIA. and now
S.I.D.E. He hoped that they weren't all connected, but feared they were.
Amalia came in with two cups of mate cocido on a tray with a sugar bowl
and a few cookies. The water must have been already hot, Jacks thought.
When she left, leaving the door open, Rodriguez frowned and whispered,
"This is very confidential, Sr. Hacks." Jacks nodded. He called Amalia
who appeared immediately in the doorway hoping to get in on the dirt.
"S√≠, se√±or?" the "se√±or" being for Rodriguez's benefit.

"I forgot about your mother being sick. You can take the rest of the day
off."

"But..." Jack was glaring at her with his chin high. "*Muy bien,
gracias*," with acid in the last word. She didn't exactly slam the door
behind her, just closed it with more force than necessary. They were
silent until they heard the outside door close, with a definite slam.

"Thank you," Rodriguez said and sipped from his cup. "I don't wish to
take up more of your time than is necessary, Sr. Hacks. So can you
please tell me if you know a Karl-Heinz and Marie Clement?"

Jacks thought a moment, then shook his head. "No, I don't think so."

They are the owners of a restaurant, Die Glocke, in the town of
Florida."

"Oh yes," Jacks said with a slight smile, remembering his
anti-interrogation techniques, which essentially consisted in remaining
calm, "I do know them slightly but didn't know that name."

"You live in Florida, isn't that right?"

"Yes."

"And you have been to the restaurant?"

"Yes, but only once."

"Isn't that unusual?"

"No, you see basically I only sleep in Florida. I eat in the city."

He smiled. "Very understandable. But your name and number is listed in
their telephone book, so we thought you might know them better."

"I gave Frau Marie my card when she was introduced to me, something I am
too much in the habit of doing I'm afraid."

"Who introduced you?"

"Freddy Hussein. He invited me for lunch there."

"Why did he invite you for lunch?"

"He's in the airline business. Airline managers often invite me for
lunch. "How well do you know him?"

"Not well at all."

"I see you smoke a pipe, Sr. Hacks," He was looking at Jacks' row of
pipes on his desk. Do you mind if I smoke?"

"Not at all." Jacks took one of the pipes from the rack and went through
the tobacco filling ritual while Rodriguez lit a cigarette.

"I tried to switch to a pipe once, but couldn't get used to it,"
Rodriguez said.

"It takes a while." Get on with it, you bastard, Jacks thought.

Rodriguez blew a noxious cloud of smoke from his blacks into the room
and Jacks puffed mightily to cover the smell.

"We suspect that they are spies," Rodriguez said suddenly, and Jacks had
to concentrate to show the right mix of surprise and innocence.

"Who?"

"We know that Hussein is a spy, for anyone who will pay him, including
us. Mr. And Mrs. Clement -- Frau Marie, you know? -- we suspect that
they are East German spies."

"East German spies -- in Argentina?"

"Oh yes, we have all kinds of spies here, Czech, Polish, British,
American and etcetera and etcetera, so why not East German as well?"
Despite his Bogart appearance, this guy was a Peter Lorre type to the
bones, complete with an oily smile. Jacks smiled back as though
appreciating the joke.

"What did you and Frau Marie talk about?"

"Nothing much. Let me think. (pause) She told me they'd been in
Argentina twice, from Hamburg I think, that the restaurant was doing
well, that kind of thing."

"And the husband?"

"No, we shook hands and he went back to the kitchen."

"That's all?"

"I think so, yes, that's all."

Rodriguez squeezed his nose, scratched an eyebrow and pulled an earlobe
in classic interrogator coming-to-the-point mode. "Sr. Hacks, your
country and mine are allies in the fight against communism, and it is
for that reason that I am sure you will cooperate with us here on our
battlefield." He waited for Jacks' reaction.

"Of course -- and I've already told you all I know."

"Yes, but we would like you to take advantage of your contacts with
these people in order to find out more."

"Sr. Rodriguez," Jacks began, throwing caution to the wind, "I dislike
communism as much as you do, but I also dislike military dictatorships,
and..."

"But, Se√±or, we are in complete agreement," Rodriguez said, smiling. "I
also dislike dictatorships -- except when they are necessary, when there
is no other choice. And we have no other choice if we don't want our
country to be taken over by the Bolsheviks, and then the domino effect
of the rest of the Latin American countries falling one after the other.
You see that, don't you?"

"Let's just say I understand the argument," Jacks replied, not wanting
to get into a debate he had already had with many Argentines and
Americans -- especially not with a guy who could "disappear" people at
will.

"Good," Rodriguez said dryly, "at least that. But back to our spies --
or should I say "alleged" spies. You see, for you alleged means nothing
has been proven yet, but for us alleged is enough. We could simply
arrest them and find out most of what we want using...mmm...other
methods? Yes, we could do that, as some of my colleagues are
recommending, strongly. But I? Well, I prefer more subtle methods. I
like to find out more before the trail gets cold, which is what would
happen if we arrested them now. And you can help me win the argument
with my less subtle comrades. Do you follow me?"

Jacks stood, walked to the window and opened it wide to let some smoke
out of the room. "Yes," he said. Rodriguez, professional interrogator,
understood and waited. Jacks' thoughts went something like this: If I
agree now it will seem as though I want to protect them, or at least
Frau Marie and if I hardly know her why would I care? Why would I want
to do that? So he breathed deeply at the window, then returned to his
chair and looked at Rodriguez.

"So what do you say?" Rodriguez asked.

"You can all go to hell for all I care," Jacks said as calmly as he
could.

Rodriguez smiled. He seemed to really enjoy the little cat and mouse
game. He had tried one avenue, but the mouse was more slippery than he
thought. So he would fall back on a more effective trap. "I have no
doubt that we are all in grave danger of going there, Se√±or, but I have
faith, you see. You are not a Christian, I assume?"

Jacks knew that by "Christian", he meant Roman Catholic, and he said,
"No, but I was once."

"Once a Christian, always a Christian."

"You mean Catholic."

"Of course, yes, thank you for correcting me: Catholic. You see, I hope
to avoid hell no matter how much time I must spend in purgatory, for I
know my goal is true and the same as the Mother Church's."

God, thought Jacks, the man is mad. "Your confessor told you so?"

"As a matter of fact, yes. But I would have continued on the same path
whatever he told me."

"Or changed confessors."

Rodriguez laughed out loud. "Yes, yes, I'm so glad to talk about such
things with a man who has a sense of humor." He sighed. "Unfortunately
we haven't time to go more deeply into such things, even if they are
extremely important. Now, my apostate friend, please understand that we
can make things difficult for you here."

A direct threat, Jacks thought. Better. And for the first time it
occurred to him to wonder if Armstrong had something to do with this
visit.

"Really," he said. "How?"

"Never mind how," Rodriguez said. "Trust me, we can."

They sat there for at least a minute smiling idiotically at each other.
Rodriguez thinking that Jacks' was imagining the terrible things they
could do to him. Jacks, however, thinking, hoping, that he was bluffing.
Jacks was, after all, a U.S. citizen, an ally with connections to his
embassy and the representative of an important international
organization of which Argentina's national airline was a member. But he
knew that there were certain unimaginably horrible things they could do
to Judith Baumgartner if they discovered her real identity and chose to
take that avenue.

"Let me think about it," he said, finally.

Rodriguez stood, still grinning, shook Jacks' hand, said, "*Gracias por
el mate cocido*," and left.

Jacks' first impulse was to phone Armstrong, but then he thought the
bastards might have his phone tapped, so he decided to take the subway
for the two stops to Panam's office. He bought a subway token for twenty
centavos, but put it in his pocket and decided to walk. It would give
him time to think. He made his way down Avenida Santa Fe in bright
autumn sunshine. A visitor who didn't keep up with the news and who
walked down that luxurious shopping street could never know that
Argentina was run by a brutal military dictatorship and that the city of
Buenos Aires was surrounded by a ring of shanty towns called *villa
miserias*. When he reached Avenida Corrientes, a main traffic artery
full of buses belching clouds of exhaust smoke and honking taxis, he
turned right towards the obelisk at the Plaza de la Rep√∫blica. He didn't
notice anything around him, for he was thinking of what he would say to
Armstrong. He had to contain his anger first of all because he wasn't
sure that Armstrong was behind the S.I.D.E. guy's visit and also because
it wouldn't do any good. He was also more fearful than ever about
Judith's safety. Now he could tell her that not only CIA but also the
S.I.D.E. was on her trail and she had to move -- and quickly. Not that
easy because her phone was certainly tapped. He turned left
automatically at the Plaza de la Rep√∫blica when he reached the obelisk,
walked down Diagonal Norte dodging pedestrians, crossed it and stepped
into the Panam building.

"Oh, hello, Mr. Jacks," Armstrong's secretary said in perfect
Anglo-Argentine English. "How are you today?" Jacks wondered if she was
also CIA; after all, it would be hard to keep secrets from a personal
secretary, better to recruit her.

"Fine, Beatr√≠z, thanks." Jacks knew the value of being on good terms
with secretaries. They could open or close doors. "Gotta see John."

"He's in a meeting right now, Mr. Jacks," she said apologetically. "You
didn't have an appointment, did you? We've been trying to contact you."

"With whom?"

"Sorry?"

"Who's he meeting with?"

"The sales manager."

"Tell him I'm here and I have to speak with him urgently."

"Well..." She frowned, all an act Jacks knew.

"Please, Bea."

She smiled. "All right, Mr. Marvin Jacks." She swivelled towards him
revealing slender unstockinged legs and a peek at her panties under a
mini-miniskirt, stood and walked into the boss's office. A minute later
she came out, followed by the sales manager, a harassed looking guy
whose name Jacks had forgotten, who shook Jacks' hand, gratefully it
seemed, because he got him out of Armstrong's clutches.

"You can go in now, Mr. Jacks," the secretary said, but he had already
walked past her into the inner sanctum.

"Hi, Marvin," Armstrong began, "You know, airline seats are the hardest
things in the world to sell. They're intangibles for godssake. Maybe I
should go into the used car business. Sit down, what can I do for you?"

"Let's go downstairs for a coffee," Jacks said.

"What? Why? We have better coffee here...oh, I getcha. Don't worry, pal,
this place is debugged, completely and forever. So sit down and relax.
He pushed the intercom button: "Bea, bring us two coffees, the Colombian
stuff."

Jacks remained standing. "A S.I.D.E. guy came to see me." He watched
Armstrong's reaction, which consisted of a raising of eyebrows.

"No kidding," he said. "What the fuck do they want? Sit the hell down,
will you. You're making me nervous."

Jacks sat in an armchair across from Armstrong in the VIP corner and
frowned at him. "They want me to work for them, find out about Frau
Marie."

"Jeez, that's interesting," Armstrong said. "Tell me more."

"When I demurred he threatened me."

"Really? How?"

"That's what I asked him. He said I should trust him, they could do it."

"Well..."

"I trust him," Jacks said. "And I want to know if you had anything to do
with it."

"Me?" -- The secretary walked in without knocking, carrying a tray with
two cups of aromatic Colombian coffee, cream, sugar, the works. She set
it down on the table between them. "Thank you, Bea," Armstrong said with
a smile. You could cut the silence until she left. "Why would I do
something like that, Marvin?"

"You want me to do the same thing. Maybe this is a less than subtle way
of saying I'm better off working for you than for them."

"What exactly do you mean by 'demurred'?" Armstrong asked.

"I said I didn't like dictatorships."

"Nice. Did you outright refuse?"

"I said I'd think about it."

"Same answer you gave me. Okay, Marvin, I categorically deny having had
anything to do with this. Furthermore..."

"I'm asking you yes or no, John, goddammit. I'm not interested in
categorical denials."

Armstrong stared at him a moment, then said, "No, definitely not,
Marvin. I wouldn't do that and I didn't. That good enough for you?"

"Are you the boss here?"

"What do you mean -- the boss?"

"Of the CIA in Argentina is what I mean."

"There's a Station Chief at the embassy of course. He wouldn't do it,
Marvin." He paused and looked at the tray. "Our coffee's getting cold.
Cream and sugar?"

"No."

Armstrong poured, half filled his own cup with sugar, then said, "Well,
maybe he would, but not without consulting me."

"Get them off my back, John," Jacks said as calmly as he could.

"We didn't put them there, Marvin...but don't worry, we'll talk to them.
What's the guy's name?"

"Rodriguez, here's his card."

"I'll tell them you're working for us then?"

"Don't fuck with me, John."

"I have to tell them something. Look, Marvin, we didn't set it up, but
it just turned out that way. We work with those bastards, sure, we have
no choice, but that doesn't mean we like them, or that they like us. So
the only way we can convince them is to say that you're already on the
case -- for us."

Jacks wasn't surprised at this turn of events, in fact he expected it.
It was, after all, logical, whether the CIA was behind the S.I.D.E.
intervention or not. All he needed now was for the KGB to show up.

"All right, John," he said, trying to sound resigned. "What do you want
me to do?"

"That's my man!" Armstrong said. "We're gonna drink to that." He jumped
up and pushed the intercom on his desk.

"Yes, sir," his secretary answered,

"Bring in a small bottle of champagne -- the French."

They sat in silence waiting for the toast. Jacks filled his pipe. When
the champagne arrived a minute later, already opened with a white towel
around it, Armstrong poured, handed a glass to Jacks and said, "To you
Marvin; you won't be sorry."

Jacks sipped first, then downed the champagne in one gulp. "So what do
you want me to do?"

"Suck up to Frau Marie, you've already got one foot in the door. Find
out what they're up to, who they really are, her and her husband I
mean."

"And you'll call off the Argentines, the S.I.D.E.?

"Right, I'll take care of that right away, don't want them fucking
things up."

"You better call them off Frau Marie and hubby as well," Jacks said. "I
can't very well find out anything if they're hanging by their toes in
some clandestine torture cell."

"Good point, not as easily done, but good point. This is good stuff,
isn't it. The French may be assholes, but they sure know how to make
champagne." Armstrong looked at his watch. "How about lunch, Marvin?"

"No thanks, John. I have a week's backlog of work back at the office."

### 19

But Jacks didn't go back to his office. It was almost lunch time and he
knew where he was going to eat. They -- the CIA and the S.I.D.E. -- were
watching Die Glocke, but now that he was, theoretically at least,
working for them both, one directly the other indirectly, there was good
reason for him to go there. Time was of the essence, he had to warn
Anneliese...Judith\...Marie. He asked Armstrong's secretary if he could
use her phone. She, thinking it was an excuse to flirt with her, said of
course he could, and pointed to the phone instead of pushing it across
the desk to him, so he had to walk around and stand next to her while he
dialled. She pressed her naked thigh into his and bent over to look at
some papers in order to reveal an ample cleavage.

Frau Marie answered. "I'd like to reserve a table for lunch today,"
Jacks said in German, sure she'd recognize his voice and slight accent.
Silence. Then, "Under what name?" "Schmidt," Jacks replied, feeling
silly. "Jawohl, Herr Schmidt." Jacks hung up the phone slowly, letting
his arm touch the secretary's breast. "See you soon, Bea."

"Auf Wiedersehen, Herr Jacks."

Do you speak German?" he asked her.

"No, but I saw The Sound of Music three times," she giggled.

Outside on the street Jacks wondered if he was being followed, not that
it mattered now, but he wanted to know. He knew something about
surveillance techniques from his M.I. training. There are several
levels: if you want the target to know he's being watched you stay very
close on his tail, and one person can do it; if you prefer that he not
know, but it's more important that he not be lost, you stay close but
not too close and you need at least two people, one on each side of the
street. If you don't want the target to know that he's being tailed you
need at least three people, preferably four, to keep changing positions.
Jacks also knew something about avoiding surveillance. In Germany he had
often gone through the motions but never really knew if he was being
followed. The Stasi, Germans in Germany, were experts. The M. I. people,
like him, were amateurs, but losing a tail, called counter-surveillance,
was much easier than doing the tailing. Like so much else in life,
negation was the easy way.

He crossed the wide Diagonal Norte with the traffic light and walked
south in the general direction of his office. After a block he came to
the subway entrance. He was at the hub of the Buenos Aires subway system
where all the lines crossed and downstairs it was like a human beehive.
He stopped before a men's clothing store and gazed into the shop window.
In the glass's reflection he saw a man directly across the street from
him looking into the window of a store, a women's lingerie shop. He was
undoubtedly watching Jacks in the reflection. Good. Now Jacks turned his
head left in the direction from which he had come. It wouldn't do at all
for a tail to stop as well and be identified. No, he would continue
walking, pass the target, then turn a corner and wait for the target to
pass him. The guy across the street would signal which way the target
was going. Jacks kept his head turned left, watching everyone who passed
him; he was waiting for everyone a half-block behind him to pass, with
one eye on the guy across the street. When he was satisfied that
everyone had passed and had time to get a safe distance beyond him, he
turned and quickly walked down the steep stairs to the subway. He felt
into his pocket for the token he had bought an hour ago but luckily
hadn't used. If he'd had to wait on line for a token they'd have had
time to catch up. He pushed through the crowd, inserted the token into
the turnstile and walked quickly to the line going north. When he got to
the platform he was again lucky for a train was just pulling in. He
boarded it, certain that he'd shaken his followers. He'd be picked up
again at Die Glocke, but at least they'd know he was not to be fucked
with.

### 20

He parked in a restricted area a few blocks from the airline's head
office. A parking ticket didn't bother him; he only hoped they wouldn't
tow away the car. A year previously he had arranged for an intermediary
to buy an Argentine Airlines test ticket at a fifty percent discount.
Airlines and travel agents may give discounts to win passengers, but
fifty percent is impossible unless something more serious is going on.
He suspected that the ticket had been stolen, which was the only way he
knew for such a large discount to be profitable. But he was mistaken. It
turned out that the General, president of the airline, had been
supplying his mistress -- or mistresses -- with free tickets, and one of
them had turned such a freebe over to a travel agent for resale. When
Jacks discovered this it presented a problem. If he followed procedure
and filed a complaint against the airline and the travel agent, he would
have to tell the whole story, step by step, in a sworn affidavit,
including the result of his investigation, that the General had simply
given the ticket away. He would of course deny everything despite the
overwhelming evidence. There would be a huge scandal which could have
resulted in Jacks being declared persona non grata in Argentina. In
fact, that very thing had happened to an over-zealous colleague in
another country. However, he couldn't simply forget about it, because
some people in the airline's accounting department knew that their
President had authorized the issuance of the free ticket which, although
technically prohibited, was fairly common only when important political
or military figures were the beneficiaries, which was far from the case
here. Furthermore, he had already spent IATA's money to buy the ticket
and it had to be accounted for.

So he had gone to the General, showed him the evidence and asked if he
had an explanation. Santamar√≠a's face got very red, but then he took a
Havana cigar from a humidor, offered Jacks one and they smoked in
silence while he sweated in thought. Jacks hoped that one option wasn't
opening a trap door for him to fall through. Finally, though, the
general said that he had obviously made a grave personal mistake and
asked Jacks if there was anything he could do for him that would
convince him not to proceed. He was offering a bribe, but all Jacks
wanted was a way out. He told him he didn't want to embarrass him, but
didn't see a way out because those other people in his airline knew
about the ticket, as did IATA. General Santamaria almost jumped out of
his chair and opened a cabinet behind him, selected a bottle of Napoleon
cognac, poured for them both and said: "Mr. Hacks, they will be silent;
I guarantee it." Jacks believed him. And from that moment on the General
owed him.

He got General Santamar√≠a's secretary on the phone, an accomplishment in
itself. He identified himself, something she already knew because he had
gone through three sub-secretaries to get to her. She told him
(naturally) that the General was in a meeting, and asked what the
subject of his need to speak to him was. "*De qu√© asunto es*?" a
perennial question in the Spanish language business and political
worlds. Jacks told her to please announce him, that the subject was
confidential and extremely urgent. She told him to hold. It seemed like
a half-hour, but was probably only a few minutes later that General
Santamar√≠a came on the line. She probably had to wake him up.

"Yes, Mr. Hacks, how are you and what can I do for you?"

You might think that Jacks should have just gone to his office and
barged in. But you would be wrong. That would have been an inexcusable
lack of etiquette in dealing with a person of his self-esteem.
Furthermore, he wouldn't have gotten past the guards on the ground
floor. Jacks told him that he had to see him immediately, that the
future of his airline and the nation was at stake. He implied it at
least.

"Well, let me see..." the general began as though looking through his
appointments schedule.

"I'm across the street, General, if you'll advise the guards I can be in
your office in two minutes." This was unheard of, but as the fog
dissipated from his brain he was remembering that Jacks knew something
which he didn't want anyone else to know. "Bueno," he growled, "make it
five," and slammed down the receiver.

Jacks left the public phone booth and sprinted down Avenida Col√≥n. The
guards asked for his ID, frisked him and let him ride up to the fifth
floor in the elevator, but not alone; one of them accompanied him. They
were exceedingly polite, figuring that anyone important enough to be
seeing the General must have at least some residual importance.
Santamar√≠a kept him waiting fifteen minutes, something important people
always do. The waiting calmed Jacks though, and he was prepared to say
what he had to say.

General Santamar√≠a sat behind his enormous desk smoking a Havana cigar
and wishing that Jacks wasn't there. Jacks told him that the S.I.D.E.
had fucked up by arresting Frau Marie and hubby because he was just
about to get really top secret information from her for the CIA that
would deal the Commies a blow they wouldn't recover from during that
millennium, if ever. Yes, he was undercover CIA. What he didn't mention,
but was lurking in the noxious air, was that he still knew about the
free tickets the general gave to his girlfriends. He listened pulling on
his earlobe and scratching his balls and when Jacks finished he said,
"Those guys (meaning S.I.D.E.) think they own the country," He thought a
moment, then added, "Call me in an hour -- at this number, from a pay
phone." He scribbled a number on a slip of paper and handed it to Jacks.
"*Mil gracias, General,"* Jacks mumbled as he backed out half-bowing.

Jacks walked around close to the Plaza de Mayo telephone center during
that interminable hour. When he called Santamar√≠a, he said, "Well Se√±or
Hacks, *she's* out, but they wouldn't release the husband, he's a KGB
officer. Anyway, they did me the favor. I hope it helps you." Meaning
that Jacks owed *him* now. Jacks controlled his elation and assured the
general that it would help. Was he glad that her husband hadn't been
released? Yes. Did he feel guilty about it? No.

Jacks decided to call from the same phone booth first Die Glocke, then
her home, although he doubted that she'd be either place so soon. Then,
if there was no answer, he'd go to his house, where she'd be looking for
her daughter -- and maybe even him. But she answered from Die Glocke
after the first ring.

"I'd like to make a reservation for tonight," he said in German.

"I'm sorry but we're closed tonight," she answered.

"This is Marvin Jacks." They'd be expecting him to contact her anyway;
now they'd have to record the conversation and find someone to translate
it, which would cause at least a short delay. "In that case perhaps we
could go some place together for dinner."

"Yes, that would be nice, Herr Jacks."

"But you'll probably want to go home first to change."

"That would be a good idea...er, do you know where my daughter is?"

"Yes, of course. I'll bring her with me in, say, an hour? Oh, and I
thought we might go to the seashore for the weekend. What do you think
about that?"

"Yes. Thank you very much."

"Good, then you can pack some things for Micaela and yourself."

"Yes."

"See you in an hour then."

"Yes."

Jacks wanted her to pick up their passports, but didn't dare mention it
on the phone. He went home, threw a few things in an overnight bag, put
his passport in his breast pocket and strapped a 22 pistol around his
ankle. If they ever got on an airplane he'd have to ditch it, but he
wouldn't be needing it by then anyway. Then he went to the neighbor's,
the Altmann's, to get Micaela. She was sitting at a table in the patio
under the grapevines drawing a picture with colored crayons. It was such
a peaceful setting that he experienced a tinge of doubt as to whether he
should take her away from such safety into the dangerous situation her
mother and he were about to face. But it wasn't for him to decide. If
Judith wanted to leave her, which he doubted, they could always stop by
to drop her off before leaving for good.

"What are you drawing, Mica?" he asked her.

"Hola, Marvin." He hadn't told her his name, she must have asked Frau
Altmann, who probably was surprised that she didn't know it. "Don't you
see? It's an angel." Indeed it was.

"Yes, I see, and a beautiful one at that." You'll need him now, he
thought, we all will.

"Let's go, we're going to pick up your mam√°."

She dropped the crayon and jumped up. "Is she all right?"

"Sure she is. Why do you ask?"

"I don't know, she's been kind of nervous lately."

"Will Micaela be coming back here?" Frau Altmann asked. "She's a
delightful child and we're glad to have her."

Jacks hated to lie to that kind lady, but had no choice. "Yes," he said,
"We're just going to Mar del Plata for the weekend."

Judith was ready to go when they got to her house. "I only packed a few
things," she said, still speaking in German, as though it were a
continuation of their telephone conversation, probably because of the
possibility that her house was bugged, "for the weekend."

"Yes, that's fine." Jacks took a pen from his pocket and signalled for
paper, then wrote, in English, *passports?* She nodded

They left the house smiling - on Jacks' instructions - with Micaela
between them. Jacks opened the Mitsubishi's doors and looked to the
front, nothing, and behind. There it was -- a green Ford Falcon with
three goons in it. He had a crazy impulse to take out the 22 and shoot
at them. Are they stupid or are they stupid? It was a dead giveaway that
they were being followed. Well, maybe they didn't care about that. But
that car was the fastest tractor on the road and he could easily lose
it. Now they'd have to head south towards the seashore, instead of north
to freedom.

An hour later they were on the highway approaching Chascomus, a sleepy
town almost halfway to Mar del Plata. There was, as usual, a lot of
Friday afternoon traffic. Jacks gunned the Mitsubishi and left the
Falcon way behind. He knew the road well and after a curve he pulled off
the highway into Chascomus, went through the town and got onto a
secondary road going back north. It was slower and they probably could
have gone back to the highway, but why take a chance. What if they'd
been seen pulling off and the cops were already watching for them in
both directions? There were police controls on the highways, but very
few on secondary roads. It took them two hours dodging potholes to get
back to Buenos Aires, skirt around it and continue north. It was dark by
then and it had already been a long day.

The moon was full though, or almost full. It occurred to Jacks that the
moon would be full regardless of what happened to them, whether they
escaped and lived happily ever after, or were captured, tortured and
killed. That selfish moon doesn't give a damn. Is death like that or is
it alive like the sun and the stars? Jacks glanced to his right at his
companion, who had been silent for a while, and saw that she was asleep,
mouth slightly open, eyelids fluttering. "Frau Marie, Anneliese, Judith
-- who cares about your name," he whispered, "I love you, and I'll tell
you so when you're awake," although he knew he wouldn't, not yet. He
wasn't so sure.

They drove all night on flat, bumpy secondary roads, through somnolent
towns. Judith took over the wheel for the last two hundred kilometres
while Jacks rested his eyes. Micaela had no problem sleeping all night
in the back seat. Jacks mentioned how interesting Micaela\'s school
seemed. It was liked a cue for Judith. "Yes, I hope there are such
schools in America. They are called Steiner or Waldorf schools."

"Is that the gent whose picture hangs of the office wall?"

"Yes, Rudolf Steiner. He was an Austrian philosopher and an initiate. He
inaugurated Anthroposophy, which he called spiritual science. And the
schools are based on his teachings about the nature of children and how
they should be educated."

Marvin Jacks was surprised to hear about spiritual science from a
lifelong committed communist. "Hmm, sounds religious, not much like
Marxism," he said.

"It\'s not a religion, but it is kind of religious, but different. I
mean it includes reincarnation and karma, things like that."

"Wow, and you believe that stuff?"

She didn\'t answer for quite a while, probably because she wasn\'t sure
of the answer. When she finally said, "I\'m beginning to," Jacks had
fallen asleep.

At sunrise they entered the border village of Puerto Iguaz√∫, squeezed
onto a narrow tongue of land between Brazil and Paraguay. They stopped
and got coffee and stale croissants at a gas station caf√©. While tanking
up Jacks asked the attendant for directions to Foz do Iguaz√∫, Brazil.

"You're going to Ciudad del Este, I bet," the attendant said with a
toothless smile. Jacks confirmed that they were, although they were
going farther than that, to the capital city of Asunci√≥n where there was
an international airport.

"The immigration assholes probably won't be awake yet, so you can
probably get by without a tip. I don't know about the Paraguayan ones
though, they're hungrier." Jacks had been to Asunci√≥n several times, but
never to the infamous "triple frontier" where Argentina, Brazil and
Paraguay meet. He knew, however, that Paraguay is the contraband capital
of the world, where you can buy anything tax-free and stolen. Most of
the new cars stolen in Brazil and Argentina -- and they are legion --
wind up in Paraguay, where you can buy them at cut-rate prices in police
stations. Hundreds of pedestrians and cars cross the bridges every day
to shop and the border police and immigration officials are well paid to
keep the traffic moving, not to intercept thieves and smugglers, who are
welcome. And it was the perfect place for fugitives, like them, to leave
Argentina.

As they approached the bridge over the Rio Paran√° to Foz do Iguaz√∫, they
saw that the gas station attendant was right -- not an immigration soul
in sight, so they drove over to Brazil. A half hour later they were at
the next bridge over the same river, already full of cars and
pedestrians crossing without the immigration people, who were ensconced
in the booths slurping mate, paying no attention to them. On the other
side was Paraguay. Judith put her hand on his arm and said, "Stop for a
minute, Marvin." He pulled over to the side of the road. "They're not
stamping passports," she said.

"No, not even looking at them," he replied.

"Yes, but if we intend to fly out of here we have to show our foreign
passports that have no entry stamps."

"We can say we came in here, over the bridge."

"I know something about this place, Marvin," she said. Micaela was
listening carefully to this serious conversation. "Remember my real
profession." Her real profession, spy, wasn't something she wanted her
daughter to hear.

"Go on," he said.

"This bridge is for people who cross with or without documents and who
leave the same way at the same place. Air travel is different. They
won't let us leave without entry stamps." She paused, waiting for a
reaction.

His head was empty. "So what do we do?"

"We ask the immigration guy to stamp us in, that like most tourists we
like stamps in our passports."

Jacks nodded, then said, "But what if they're looking for us?"

"The Paraguayans won't be -- not yet at least, I hope."

"Okay, it's worth the risk", he said. "Give me your passports."

She didn't move.

"Judith?"

"I think it would be better if you gave me yours. I'll go in with
Micaela. You stay in the car sulking because you think it's silly to
waste time for stamps. That's what I'll tell him."

It was obvious that she could charm the pants off any macho, so he
nodded approval and handed her his passport. She put a twenty dollar
bill inside it. They drove past the Brazilian immigration booth and
stopped at the Paraguayan one fifty yards further on. Judith and Micaela
got out of the car and walked in. Jacks watched her smiling at the guard
and explaining, then pointing to him with a laugh. He scowled
appropriately. The guard had stood up politely. He was talking now, and
pointing back at the Brazilian side. Judith looked serious. She shook
her head and pointed at Jacks again. She picked up the passports and
came back to the car clutching Micaela's hand. She leaned into the
window.

"He said he couldn't stamp us in without a Brazilian stamp and for that
we'd have to have an Argentine one stamping us out," she whispered. "He
said we should go back and get the Brazilian and Argentine stamps first.
I said you were already angry and I didn't want to infuriate you, but
that I'd ask you."

Jacks' brain started working again. "I don't think it's good idea."

"Nor do I."

"Get in and let's get out of here."

Judith turned back to the guard, shook her head, shrugged her shoulders
and got back into the car with Micaela.

"Have a good visit to Paraguay," the guard called out, happy to have
earned twenty bucks for nothing. After she and Micaela were in the car
Jacks drove off after wiping the sweat off his hands on his trousers.

"It's suspicious," he said.

"Yes, but he's an idiot."

"But what do we do now without entry stamps?"

"I know a place in Asunci√≥n where we can get passports," she said
calmly.

"With different names? Great!" Jacks said, thinking that the Paraguayan
airport police, also servants of a dictatorship, would be more efficient
and might already have their names.

Following Judith's directions, Jacks drove to a slum section of Asunci√≥n
and stopped at what looked like an oversized box made of rusty
corrugated tin. They got out of the car and Micaela held her mother's
hand as they walked into the box without knocking. A skinny guy was
working on a lathe so didn't hear them come in until they were almost
past him. Then he turned off the lathe, stepped in front of Judith, who
was in the lead, and said "Se√±ora?"

"We're going to see Agusto," she said.

"Ah, is he expecting you?"

"No, just tell him that Marie from Buenos Aires is here."

"Marie who?"

"Tell him," she replied with an authority that surprised both the skinny
guy and Jacks. He turned and walked to the far end of the box, about ten
yards away, and knocked -- two shorts and a long -- and entered. They
waited two minutes and the door opened and Agusto came out with a big
smile on his fat face. He was wearing a tie and jacket, which he had
probably just put on because the shirt under it was soaked with sweat,
while the jacket was fresh.

"Se√±ora Marie!" he gushed in Spanish, such a pleasure to see you again."
He took her hand and kissed it, must have seen that in a movie. He
patted Micaela's head, looked at Jacks, then inquiringly at Judith. "*Un
amigo*," she said.

"Ah. Well, please come into my den, said the fly to the spider." He
laughed alone at his own joke and led the way back to the den, a
luxuriously appointed office in fact. He sat behind an oak desk and
motioned for them to sit. Judith remained standing, so Jacks did as
well.

"We need three passports, Agusto," she said, "pronto!"

His smile vanished. Business. "I see. For you three?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"Yesterday."

"Any particular nationality?

"What do you have?"

"Paraguayan, of course, then ...let me think...German?"

"German will do."

"I don't have a child's passport though." Silence. So they were stolen
passports and all he changed were the photographs. "But I may be able to
get one. Wait." He picked up his phone and pressed a button on the
console, then spoke in a language Jacks guessed was Arabic. It took
quite a while, but when he hung up he smiled his cheesy smile and said,
"*No hay problema."*

"When will they be ready?" Judith asked.

"After the photos, about an hour. You realize of course that the child's
passport will cost a bit more because..."

"The same price as always, Agusto, if you want to keep dealing with us."
Cold -- she really didn't like this guy, which was easy to understand.

Agusto scowled, but said, "I will make the sacrifice for a lady." He
stood up with some effort and pulled back a curtain at one side of the
office. "You first, young lady," he said to Micaela, who looked at her
mother. Judith nodded and the child stood against a cream-colored plaque
against the wall. Agusto snapped her picture and then the others.

"Deliver them to us at the airport," Judith said, forcing a smile.
"We'll pay the messenger. He'll know us by the photos"

"As you wish, Se√±ora Marie", Augusto said. "Oh, by the way, I have the
new passports here for your two friends, Barkarian and Wilson." He
opened a drawer in his desk and took out an envelope. \"Do you want to
take them with you or shall I send them?\"

"Send them the usual way," Judith said.

"Why don't we take them with us?" Jacks said in German. "It's faster and
safer." Agusto may or may not have understood him, but in any case he
sounded like a boss from East Germany, he hoped.

She looked at him, surprised, and said. "Ja, nat√ºrlich." Jacks held out
his hand to Agusto. He looked at Judith, who nodded, and he gave Jacks
the envelope.

While they were driving to the airport, she asked, "Why do you want us
to take those passports?"

"Who are they?" he asked.

"Couriers, of no importance."

"We may be able to use them, you never know."

"How much will the passports cost?" Jacks asked her once they got to the
airport and saw that there was a Lineas A√©reas Paraguayas flight leaving
in two hours for Miami.

"A thousand dollars a piece."

He whistled. "Do we have that much?"

"Maybe, but I have no intention of paying that bastard Agusto that
much."

"How will we get the passports then?

"You'll see, come on."

She went to the currency exchange booth and changed a hundred dollar
bill for small denominations, mostly singles. She bought a large
envelope, put hundreds at both ends and singles and fives between them
and sealed the envelope with strong glue.

"Won't the messenger check?" Jacks asked her.

"I don't think so. We'll soon see."

He didn't. It was a kid who came on a motorbike. They were sitting near
the entrance so he spotted them right away. "Se√±ora Mar√≠a?" he asked.

"Judith held out her hand and the boy put an envelope into it. She
handed him the other envelope and a ten dollar bill. "For you," she
said. "*Gracias, se√±ora*," he said smiling, put the envelope in his
backpack and sped off. They looked at the passports. Judith and Jacks
were Herr and Frau M√ºller and Micaela was Inge Schulz.

Judith looked at Jacks. "*Mein Gott*, your passport name is different
from your credit card name."

Jacks smiled. "*No hay problema*." He took the passports and strolled
over to the L.A.P. ticket counter. After waiting for the ticket agent to
finish with a passenger, he handed her the three passports and his
credit card. "I want tickets for these three passengers, Miami, one-way,
open." She would have to think he was some kind of unofficial travel
agent and there was no law against buying tickets for clients. She made
an imprint of the credit card, wrote out the tickets (L.A.P. couldn't
afford machines, apparently), he signed and said, "Oh, what's the phone
number of reservations again?"

"I can make the reservations for you," she said.

"Yes, but this is for future reference, I'm travelling too and forgot my
address book." She wrote the number on a slip of paper. "Gracias," he
said. "*Gracias a usted., se√±or*."

He strolled over to the telephone booths, which were all occupied. He
waited. Finally a woman came out of one wiping her eyes. He dialled the
number the clerk had given him and asked for three seats on the flight
leaving in one hour for Miami. She asked if they could make it to the
airport in time. Yes, he said, we're very close. Reservations confirmed.
He beckoned Judith and Micaela over and they checked in for the flight.
The agent checked her computer, revalidated their tickets and asked
about baggage. Only carry-on, Jacks said. Unusual, but so what. "Let's
get through immigration before Agusto comes looking for us," he said to
Judith.

### 21

...*We will be arriving at Buenos Aires International airport in
approximately two and a half hours*," the intercom on the old Boeing 707
blared almost unintelligibly in Spanish and English. Jacks' heart jumped
and he pressed the overhead button for the flight attendant. There were
no three seats together available, so Judith and Micaela were seated a
few rows ahead of him. Judith was speaking to her daughter, and didn't
seem to have paid attention to the announcement.

"I thought this flight was going to Miami," Jacks told the flight
attendant who was holding onto the overhead baggage rack as she leaned
down to hear him.

"We're stopping in Buenos Aires first, se√±or," she shouted into his ear,
"to pick up passengers." And she scuttled down the aisle to other
passengers who probably had the same question. Of course, Jacks thought,
L.A.P. didn't have enough passengers from Paraguay directly to Miami, so
they took a long detour in the opposite direction to pick up passengers
in Argentina, where they sold tickets at hefty discounts. He'd forgotten
about that.

He knelt alongside Judith and told her that they would be landing in
Buenos Aires, but would be in transit, so no problem. Her eyes opened
wide as this sunk in, then she just shook her head and sighed, so he
went back to his seat.

¬†

The transit area at Ezeiza, Buenos Aires's international airport, was
chaotic. Hundreds of British passengers were milling around looking
nervously at their watches, yelling at their kids to sit still, don't
get lost, conferring with each other in whispers. Judith, Micaela and
Jacks sat facing the window looking out to the runways so their faces
couldn't be seen by passers-by. Refuelling would take an hour. An
elderly English woman passed in front of them, stopped to look out the
window then turned to Jacks, apparently mistaking him for a compatriot
and said, "I wonder what's delaying it. Have you heard anything?"

"About what?"

"Do you mean you haven't heard?"

"I guess not."

"The Argies have invaded the Falkland Islands. Can you imagine? We're
tourists. They said we can leave, but the British Airways airplane
should have been here an hour ago.." She put her hand over her mouth.
"Oh! You're not Argentineans, are you?"

"No," Jacks said to her immense relief.

An immaculately dressed man about her own age who had been listening
from the row behind them came forward and approached her. In accented
English he said, "Madam, I *am* an Argentinean and I assure you that we
have nothing against you and you have nothing to worry about. When this
terrible nonsense is over I do hope you will visit us once again. You
will be most welcome." He bowed slightly and walked away. The woman,
astonished, scurried back to her group with the news.

A few minutes later a man crossed Jack's view and sat next to him. Jacks
didn't look at him until he spoke sotto-voce, in English, American
accent.

"Hi, Marvin, or should I say Lt. Jacks, retired." After Jacks looked at
his profile it took a moment for recognition. He faced forward again and
in the same tone said, "Master Sergeant Jack Quinn I presume -- without
the stripes. What a coincidence."

"I don't believe in coincidences, Jacks; didn't I ever tell you that?"

"Yes, and I'm beginning to agree. So why are we meeting again in this
unlikely place?" He was keeping up the tough guy chatter, but his palms
were sweating.

"I'm looking for a guy with your name who fits your description to a T,
accompanied by a woman and a child who look like the two subjects on
your right." Micaela was next to Jacks, asleep with her head in Judith's
lap, who couldn't hear their conversation.

"Doesn't sound like a coincidence then," Jacks said.

"Nope."

"Let me guess. CIA?"

"Good guess. Station chief, Rio."

"This is Buenos Aires."

"Also me. When I got the request to advise all Brazilian entry points to
pick up your little family and you on sight, I decided to come on down
and look myself, since I can identify you. Our Argentine colleagues are
still checking the roads, but I happen to know that you're a frequent
flyer."

"So you've finally made it to the officer class," Jacks said.

Quinn turned his head and looked at Jacks, "You're not makin' a very
good impression, Marvin. And I think you'll want to, under the
circumstances. Goin' to Miami?"

"Yes, obviously, I hope."

"And then."

"She's defecting, Jack."

"To you?" Quinn growled. \"Who the fuck are you?\"

"No, to you."

He laughed. "Good one."

"No, I mean it, I'm really glad to see you."

"I should turn you, them that is, over to our friends here, and get them
later when its our turn."

"S.I.D.E.?" You mean you'll get what's left. Give us a break, Jack."

"How'd you get out of Asunci√≥n? They're looking for you too."

"I promise we'll go straight to the CIA in Miami. In fact, you can give
us the address."

"Seems your girlfriend's important, Marvin, runs the East German covert
operation in Latin America."

"Not her husband?

"Her! the hubby's a hit man. You seem to be attracted to female spies. I
remember something similar happening in Germany way back then."

"It's the same one, Jack."

Quinn looked over at Judith. "No shit? See what I mean? No
coincidences."

"Give us a break, Jack."

"You got no problem," he said. "Just a stupid American bystander."

"It's more complicated than that."

"Okay, let's have it."

"We're travelling with false documents."

Quinn nodded. "So that's how you got out of Paraguay."

Jacks reached into his carry-on and pulled out the envelope the
Paraguayan forger had given him. "That's right, and here are forged
passports for two East German couriers, with their address in Madrid.
And in a minute I'll give you the name and address of the forger in
Asunci√≥n." Judith was tapping on her armrest nervously. Quinn glanced at
the passports, put them in his pocket, and said, "Let's change seats."
They switched seats and Quinn said to Judith, in German, "Are you
defecting to the United States of America?" She didn't bother to look at
Jacks for confirmation, just said, "*Jawohl*."

"Trust me, Quinn," Jacks said, "we'll check in at the CIA on arrival."

"I trust you, Marvin, so much so that I'm gonna leave you alone here for
a few minutes while I go downstairs to buy a ticket on this flight.
Here's my card. If anyone bothers you -- this place is crawling with
S.I.D.E. looking for the horde of British spies they're imagining --
tell them you're waiting for me." He stood up and started to walk away,
then stopped and sat again on Jack's side away from Judith. "Are you
sticking with her, I mean for good?"

"I guess so," an answer that surprised even Jacks by its lack of
enthusiasm.

*During the long flight to Miami Marvin Jacks had another revelation. He
had been in love with Anneliese Cornelius a long time ago, who wasn't
real then, and was even less real now as Frau Marie Clement. He didn't
know her very well and wasn\'t sure if he wanted to know Judith
Baumgartner, super spy, all that well either. Oh he'd stick with her all
right, through her CIA interrogation hell, which would be a hell of a
lot more comfortable than a S.I.D.E. one. A defector is treated much
better than a captured spy; one is a repentant friend and the other a
recalcitrant enemy. He was confident that his old buddy, ex-Master
Sergeant Jack Quinn, would see to it that she was a defector. Although
he said a few words to her and she responded with only one, the gleam in
his eye when he looked at her indicated that he would much prefer to
have her as a friend. She'd have a secret identity in the U.S. for¬†a
while, until the German Democratic Republic and its obscene Berlin Wall
collapsed, which wasn't so far in the future, Jacks assumed, and then
she'd want to go back to Germany, which wasn't his cup of tea*.

### 22

### Afterword

In1989, a few days after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Marvin Jacks read
about her in a syndicated newspaper column. A young reporter in Madison,
Wisconsin had learned about her years before that, but the CIA convinced
his paper to hold the story, not only for national security reasons but
also for her safety. But when the German Democratic Republic ceased to
exist for all practical purposes, there was no reason to hold the story
any longer. The problem was that so long after the facts it was no
longer a hot story. The reporter had moved on and had become nationally
syndicated, so he ran it as human interest directly connected with the
fall of the Wall and. later, of the German democratic Republic -- which
had never been either democratic or a republic -- which was covering the
front pages of the world.

Judith Baumgartner had been living in Madison with her daughter in a
defector protection program, working as a German teacher in a Rudolf
Steiner Waldorf school, where her daughter was a pupil. The Stasi
somehow found out who and where she was -- something which was never
supposed to happen -- and sent a hit man to eliminate her. They were
pissed off. As an experienced spy, when she defected she was able to
give the CIA information about the Stasi infrastructure, modus operandi,
names, etc. The hit man (let's call him Hans as the reporter
unimaginatively did), was on his first job and wasn't really a hit man.
They'd sent him because their experienced assassins, knowing that the
regime was wobbly, were either disappearing into West Germany or were
afraid of getting caught trying to enter the United States so late in
the game. Hans, however, had entered the U.S. on several previous
occasions on minor missions with a genuine Spanish passport. His father
was a Spanish communist and his mother a German one. He was born in East
Germany, had attended primary school in Spain and his Spanish was
fluent, so he easily passed for the real thing.

Hans wasn't stupid. When he got to Madison, instead of killing Judith he
telephoned from a public phone far from his motel and told her who he
was and what his mission was and that he had never killed anyone in his
life and preferred to join her rather than kill her. She figured that if
she refused to help him he might feel forced to carry out his mission.
So she said *Ja* -- and told him to call her the next day. She got in
touch with her old buddy Jack Quinn, now a section head (to a large
extent thanks to her defection) at Langley. Quinn flew to Madison*. *So
when Hans rang her doorbell Quinn was sitting there on the couch with a
big smile and another agent was behind a curtain with a rifle pointed at
the door. A third agent was behind a bush in the garden ready to plug
Hans if he were to take out a weapon when she opened the door. It was
all unnecessary though. Hans was unarmed and wanted nothing more than to
throw himself into the arms of the CIA with defector status.

Until he read the story not even Marvin Jacks knew where she was. At the
time of her defection he had passed up the opportunity to continue as
her lover because it could have compromised her and Micaela\'s safety
and, well, maybe this was one too many identities for him to swallow.
Life is complicated enough, he told himself. He knew that Quinn had also
been hot for her, but that kind of relationship between an agent and a
defector is definitely frowned upon by the CIA. Now, having just
separated from another partner who, though beautiful and rich, was
boring, Jacks felt that perhaps he had made a mistake. So he called Jack
Quinn and asked him about Judith.

"She's left for Germany as soon as the GDR collapsed, Marvin," he said.

"Ah, For good?"

"Looks like it. Seems she\'s become an anthroposophist, whatever that
is. Better that a communist, I guess."

Marvin Jacks had a vague idea of what an anthroposophist is. Herr S-K
had bent his ear about it during the time they were waiting for Micaela
in the Rudolf Steiner Schule. And later during the long drive from
Buenos Aires to Paraguay Anneliese also spoke about it, but in a less
fundamentalist way than Herr S-K. It has to do with reincarnation and
karma, something he\'d been interested in since reading about it, but
not the Indian version, according to which you can reincarnate in
animals. Since she worked as a teacher in a Steiner school (called
"Waldorf" in the U.S.) in Madison, she might well do the same in
Germany. But where? Marvin decided that Herr S-K of the Rudolf Steiner
Schule in Florida, Province of Buenos Aires, might be able to give him a
hint.

On the following morning, a pleasant Spring day, which he took as a good
omen, he entered the school\'s office at one o\'clock when classes
should be letting out and confronted Frau Fincklefrick. When she said
that Herr S-K was busy and asked what he wanted to see him about, he
decided that she was the kind of German who only understood orders.
"*Sagen Sie Herrn S-K dass ich hier bin und dringend mit ihm sprechen
muss -- sofort!*" he shouted. She jumped up like a scared rabbit.
"Jawohl, mein herr." and rolled out the door. A minute later Herr S-K
entered looking worried. I glanced severely at Frau F, who bowed out and
closed the door. Naturally Herr S-K wanted to know about Micaela and her
mother. I told him that they had returned to Germany now that the GDR no
longer existed, and Marie had loved his school so much that she wanted
to be a teacher in one. Could he give her advice on how to go about it?

"In Germany?" he exclaimed. "She must go to the Waldorf Teachers
Training Seminar in Stuttgart, we send our own teachers there." He
grasped Marvin\'s hand, surprising him with his strength. "Das ist
wunderbar! Can you tell her? Are you going to Germany too?" Jacks said,
truthfully, that he expected to visit Germany soon and would certainly
tell her.

By the time he reached his house he had it mostly figured out. He dived
into the pool and floated. He would fly to Germany on Friday. A weekend
jaunt wouldn\'t do, though. He\'d have to take a few days\' vacation
time. In Frankfurt he\'d rent a car on Sunday. No, he\'d go by one of
Germany\'s excellent trains; there must be several a day from Frankfurt
to Stuttgart. On Monday morning he\'d be in the Waldorf Teachers
Training Seminar, where he\'s ask for\....who? Her real name of course.
He was confident she\'d be there. After all, how could two people be
thrown together repeatedly in such unusual circumstances without it
being their mutual destiny\...or, rather, karma, as Judith would say?
First in San Francisco as Olga the Russian; then as Anneliese the East
German, then in Buenos Aires as Frau Marie, the West German. He had been
in love with all those incarnations. New it was time to meet and love
Judith Baumgartner, ex-spy, ex-pretender, the real thing.

*Despite the demise of the Soviet Union, spying has not lost its allure,
nor, as far as we know, has love.*

**About the author**

Frank Thomas Smith is an American expatriate who has lived and worked
most of his life in South America and Europe. He is the editor and
publisher of the online magazine SouthernCrossReview.org.


