# The Magic Mound

![](mound-map.jpg){class="alarge"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 4

### Vitaluz, the Youth Potion

A girl dressed like Mara came through the palace\'s front gate and
walked towards them. She was smiling and had her hands stretched out in
a gesture which obviously meant welcome. Sergio and Divino thought she
must be Mara\'s sister because they looked so much alike they could have
been twins.

\"This is Sergio and the little one is Divino,\" Mara told her.

\"What lovely names!\" she said in a voice somewhat deeper than Mara\'s.
Sergio was pleased that not only Divino\'s name had been praised.

\"Come.\" She put her arms around the boys\' shoulders and led them into
the palace grounds.

\"Are we going to meet Queen Mamara now?\" Divino asked her.

Both she and Mara burst out laughing. The boys smiled awkwardly as you
sometimes do when you don\'t get the joke. Finally Mara, who could
hardly contain herself, said, \"This is Mamara.\"

Divino stopped in his tracks and looked in astonishment at the girl
whose hand was on his shoulder. \"The queen?\" he said.

Mamara smiled and put her hand on Divino\'s head. \"You are surprised,
both of you, because I am Mara\'s mother yet I don\'t look any older
than she. That\'s because you don\'t yet know anything about us. I shall
explain everything to you, but later. You must be tired and hungry, so
come into the garden and have something to eat.

Sergio and Divino were very hungry but they didn\'t feel tired yet. As
they followed Mamara and Mara around to the back of the palace they
looked around them. Some girls who seemed to be about the same age as
their guides worked at various chores such as washing clothes and
painting. Others seemed to be playing. They stopped their activities as
the boys passed and stood looking curiously at them. Some smiled shyly.
Sergio noticed that more girls were stationed at ramparts built on the
four corners of the palace and halfway between the corners. They must
have been guards for they carried long pointed spears. They also watched
the party pass below them, but did not smile. The only people the boys
had seen so far were girls and they all wore the same kind of robe
which, they learned later, were called tararobes. Trees and flowers were
in abundance in the garden and a delightful smell of blossoms filled the
air. Bees were very busy as there was so much for them to do. They were
not the same bees the boys knew from Brazil, for they were native to
Maxa only. They were smaller and flitted more quickly from flower to
flower.

Under a huge old apple tree in a corner of the garden a table was set
with wooden plates and cups made from avocado pear shells. They sat down
and Mamara clapped three times. A girl appeared carrying a large wooden
platter containing luscious-looking fruit. Soon another girl came and
placed an earthenware jug on the table. Queen Mamara told the boys to
help themselves.

After they had eaten, Sergio asked what the drink was. Mara said that it
was a mixture of honey and dew. The boys agreed that they had never
drunk anything quite so delicious in their lives.

Queen Mamara asked them about their life in Brazil and Sergio described
the favela and their little school and Dona Ute. While he was talking
Mamara\'s and Mara\'s faces expressed shock and sadness. When he
finished Mamara said that their life in Brazil must be awful and she
felt sorry for them.

\"But we\'re lucky, we live with Dona Ute now and go to the little
school,\" Divino exclaimed

\"Yes, I suppose you are,\" Mamara said. \"And Dona Ute, who has become
your mother, is a very good person.\" Divino wanted to protest that Dona
Ute was their teacher, not their mother, but Mamara didn\'t pause.
\"Only everything is so ugly there, the food is bad and there is dirt
and disease and death. We have none of that here.\"

\"Don\'t you ever die?\" Divino asked, astonished. For a little boy he
had a lot of experience with death. Someone was always dying in the
favela, especially babies. And grown-ups died from disease or were
killed by criminals.

Mamara looked at him sternly. \"We can die, but only if and when we want
to.\"

\"When you get too old?\"

She smiled. \"Do you see any old people here?\"

Sergio had already noticed the absence of old people and men. He would
have liked to ask about Mireya as well, but didn\'t because it would get
Mara in trouble with the queen.

\"You may have also noticed that there are no men here,\" Mamara said.
\"If you are not too tired, I will tell you why.\"

They assured her that they weren\'t tired, though in fact they were
beginning to feel drowsy, which was natural after the meal and their
long walk.

\"There used to be men here in Maxanatara,\" Mamara began, then paused
to collect her thoughts, something which Maxanians do frequently.

\"What happened to them?\" Divino asked impatiently.

\"Wait, little child of God,\" Mara admonished, \"the queen will tell
you when she is ready.

\"Maxa is divided into three parts by a river and a range of
mountains,\" Mamara said when she was ready. \"The river is called
Riovita. It flows in two branches from the corners of Urmaxa in the far
north. The branches join just below Urmaxa in the middle and the river,
now one, continues flowing south dividing Maxanatara and Maxalabora.\"
She stopped again, but not for long this time. \"Perhaps it is two
rivers that unite below Urmaxa, but that does not matter, for us it is
all Riovita. Here, I\'ll draw it for you.\" She clapped twice and a girl
came with a large piece of parchment shaped like a leaf and a small
gourd with a quill pen in it. Queen Mamara took the pen and drew a map
of Maxa on the parchment.

\"The Riovita is a strongly flowing river,\" she continued, \"so strong
that it can only be crossed over two bridges at its narrowest points.
They are called Eastbridge, here in the northeast, and Westbridge in the
northwest.\" She drew the bridges on the map. As you can see, the only
way to get from Maxanatara to Maxalabora is across the Eastbridge into
Urmaxa and then across the Westbridge into Maxalabora.

\"Where are we now?\" Sergio asked her.

\"Here.\" She sketched in the palace in Maxanatara.

\"And the magic mound?\" Divino asked.

Mamara drew a circle a few inches below the palace. \"Here is the magic
mound, as you call it.\" Then she sketched quick, squiggly lines all
over Urmaxa. These are mountains,\" she explained, \"and there is only
one path through them.\" She traced the path without hesitation as
though she knew every twist and turn like the palm of her hand. It ran
like a snake from Eastbridge to the north, where it made a loop, then
down and across Urmaxa until it reached Eastbridge. The boys were to
discover later that Maxanians are not to be confided in when accuracy of
detail is concerned and that the reality was quite different from
Mamara\'s map.

Mamara looked at Sergio, then at Divino. Her clear black eyes shone.
\"You may be wondering why I am drawing this map when I promised to tell
you why there are no men here. It is because you must know all about
Maxa, including its geography and history, before you can understand why
our men have gone, and where. She closed her eyes and thought again for
what seemed a long time to the boys.

[Chapter Five](magic-mound-5.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle:

[The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)

and in Spanish at:

[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)

