# The Magic Mound

![](mound-map.jpg){class="alarge"}

### Chapter 5

### Queen Mamara relates the history of Maxa

\"So much for geography, now for our history,\" Queen Mamara said when
she opened her eyes. \"Where shall I start?\" she asked herself.

\"Dona Ute says it\'s always best to start at the beginning,\" Sergio
suggested.

\"Well then, I will start at the beginning, for it is clear that Dona
Ute is right about many things.\" The boys looked at each other,
pleased.

\"In the beginning God created the first Maxanians, a woman and a man.
There names were Ara and Alam.\" Sergio had the impression that she had
intended to begin at the beginning all along, for she didn\'t pause this
time.\"

\"Which came first?\" Divino piped up.

\"The woman, of course. All men are born of women, didn\'t you know
that?\"

\"What Divino means,\" Sergio explained, \"is that *our* first person
was a man, Adam, and the first woman, Eve, was made from his rib.\"

\"How strange. In any case you will have to learn that Maxa is very
different from Brazil. Our God created Ara, the first woman, and she
gave birth to Alam, the first man.\"

\"Who was his father?\" Divino asked and wished he hadn\'t because Mara
giggled.

\"Ara was his mother and his father,\" Queen Mamara said, \"and also his
wife.\"

\"When he grew up?\" At this Mara burst out laughing.

\"Mara!\" her mother scolded, \"please control yourself.\"

\"I\'m sorry mother, but he asks such silly questions.\"

\"We know they are like that, always asking, so let me get on with it.\"

How does she know? Sergio thought. Because of Mireya?

\"Ara and Aram lived happily in Urmaxa until one night Light, the God\'s
daughter, told Alam in a dream that across the Riovita, here in
Maxanatara, life would be pleasanter that in Urmaxa. They would not have
to scratch the earth for a living or hunt the fierce mountain goats, for
here the fruit falls from the trees into your hands, and it is always
warm so they would never be cold as they often were in Urmaxa. Alam,
however, remembered the God\'s warning: they should never cross the
river.\"

\"Why not?\" the eternal questioner, Divino, asked.

\"When a God prohibits something one does not ask why, \" Mamara said
sternly.\"

\"May I ask something, Queen Mamara?\" This time it was Sergio.

\"Yes, you may, but it would be better if you let me finish and your
questions may be answered without your having to ask.\"

The boys were used to asking questions in their little school, so Sergio
was not put off by this reply. \"Since Ara and Alam were the first
people, the bridges over the Riovita couldn\'t have been built yet.\"

\"True,\" Mamara answered with a mixture of respect for Sergio\'s
reasoning and annoyance at the interruption. \"They couldn\'t have
crossed anyway, yet. But I\'ll come to that.\"

\"What\'s the God\'s name?\" Divino asked.

Mamara seemed momentarily confused. \"I don\'t know.\" Obviously she had
never thought about it and had no desire to think about it now. She went
on.

\"Light quarreled with the God because he was always lording it over
her. She felt that as his daughter she should have as much power as he
did. He wouldn\'t listen though. She also thought it a pity that Ara and
Alam were condemned to live forever in Urmaxa when it was so much nicer
in Maxanatara...\"

\"Maybe it wasn\'t forever,\" Sergio interrupted.

\"What do you mean?\"

\"Well, maybe the God wanted them to live for a while in Urmaxa and go
to Maxanatara when he felt they were ready.\"

This was a new idea for Mamara and Mara and they looked at Sergio with
their mouths open. Finally Mamara waved her hand across her face as
though brushing the idea aside. \"Light decided to defy her father. She
told Alam in the dream to go to the bank of the Riovita at its narrowest
point, where the Eastbridge is now. She said that he should not worry
about the God, that she would handle him.\" Mamara\'s hands moved
animatedly as she spoke.

\"The next morning, despite the fear he felt in his stomach, Alam went
to the bank of the river and saw Light there in physical form, not only
in a dream. She was very beautiful. She told him that if he would serve
her instead of her father she would tell him how to cross the river.
Alam was so afraid of the God, however, that he could not bring himself
to promise that. So Light said she would show him anyway, because she
knew he loved her.

\"Did she make the bridge?\" Divino asked.

\"No, she taught him how to make it. After years of labor he completed
it.\"

\"Why did it take him so long?\" Divino wanted to know.

\"So long?\" Mamara was surprised that Divino considered years to be a
long time. \"He had to cut his own stone, make his own tools,
everything, and it is a wonderful bridge, still standing strong after
such a long time. Besides, he was not in a hurry. Maxanians are never in
a hurry, like you are.\"

\"We\'re only in a hurry because Dona Ute will be worried about us.\"

Mamara ignored this comment and continued. \"When Alam finished building
the Eastbridge, Light told him to go across into Maxanatara. She told
him she would hide the bridge from the God and he would never even know
that Alam was there. So Alam, trembling, crossed the bridge into
Maxanatara and began to explore the land. He saw the flat rich earth and
the sumptuous forests teeming with animals and plants and fruit and
clear running brooks of shining water. He saw all this and knew that
Light had told the truth, that it was much better than Urmaxa. Then he
went back to fetch Ara who, however, did not want to go.

\"She was afraid of the God, I bet,\" Divino said.

\"She may have been jealous of Light as well, although she had no need
to be, for it is silly to be jealous of a goddess. But when Alam
described Maxanatara to her the temptation to see it was so great that
she went with him to the bridge \'just to look\', as she put it. Alam
crossed over and walked a short way into the forest. He returned with a
honey-fruit and gave it to Ara. She took a bite and smiled, for it was
the most delicious thing she had ever tasted. She crossed the bridge
with Alam and stood in Maxanatara beside him.\"

Mamara closed her eyes and put her hand on her heart as though what she
was about to say would pain her. \"They were about to enter the forest
when a tremendous thunderclap opened the heavens and a torrent of
driving rain fell on them. It rained for three days and three nights and
the Riovita became so swollen that it covered the bridge. Fortunately,
Alam had built it so sturdily that it was strong enough to withstand the
force of the surging river.\"

Sergio and Divino were completely absorbed in Queen Mamara\'s story.
Even Mara, who had heard it many times, sat transfixed, listening.

Then the God spoke to them. His voice was far more terrible than the
thunder: *You have disobeyed me. Now you will be punished. *Alam and Ara
were terrified and they tried to hide in the forest, but the God\'s
voice was everywhere. *I created you immortal, as I am. Now you will
learn to know death. *That was all. The thunder stopped, the rain slowed
to a drizzle and finally the sun came out. When they got over their
first fright, Ara and Alam were quite content and they almost forgot the
God\'s words because they hadn\'t understood them.\"

\"Why not?\" Divino, who hadn\'t understood them very well either,
asked.

\"Because they had never known death, so they could not know what it
is.\" Mamara\'s face softened and she smiled. Shortly afterwards Ara
gave birth to her first child. Then, a year later, her second child was
born, a boy and a girl. They were very happy until, years later, they
noticed that they were growing old. They didn\'t understand it, they
only knew that every year they grew weaker. After many years Alam went
blind and then Ara died. Alam, mad with grief, cried out to Light: \'You
deceived me. You said you would hide the bridge from the God\'s sight,
but he found it and now I am doomed.\'

"Light answered him in a dream: \'You are ungrateful, Alam, but I have
no choice but to hear your words.\' She showed him how to make
Vidaluz.\" Mamara glanced at the earthenware jug on the table. \"The dew
had to be removed from grass blades during the full moon and mixed with
pure honey. It was then prepared according to a secret formula known
only to Alam. Whoever drank it would never be ill or grow old, or die.\"

Sergio looked down at the gourd he had been drinking from, then he
looked up at Mamara. \"Yes,\" she said, \"that is the holy drink, but
one must drink some every month during the full moon to maintain
immortality.\"

\"Is the moon...\"

\"Yes, the moon is full now.\"

Divino leaned towards his brother. \"Does that mean we\'ll never die?\"
he whispered.

But Sergio was thinking of something else. \"Does that mean we\'ll never
grow up?\" he asked Mamara.

\"If you drink some every month on the day of the full moon you would
not age at all. That you have drunk it today means only that you will
not age until the next full moon.\"

\"That\'s not very long,\" Divino said. \"Maybe we could take some home
with us, Sergio.\"

\"It is forbidden to take Vidaluz out of the palace,\" Mamara said,
frowning at him. \"Everyone gets their ration here.\"

Suddenly the significance of Mamara\'s words struck Sergio. \"But we
*want* to grow up,\" he said.

\"Of course you do, Sergio,\" Mamara said, smiling now. \"Don\'t worry
about that now, you have only drunk enough for one month.\"

Sergio looked at Divino, who understood from his glance that they would
drink no more Vidaluz.

Continued in the next issue of SouthernCrossReview (or sooner).

[Chapter Three](https://southerncrossreview.org/147/magic-mound-1.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle:

[The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)

and in Spanish at:

[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)

