# Intergalactic Reincarnation

![](intergalactic.jpg){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

Beyond the highest, Aconcagua\'s peak,\
Lives a lady of fragile health,\
Known by the name Mireya.

Her glance, her smile are all I seek,\
Are more to me than worlds of wealth,\
The ailing lady, Mireya.

Her steps are slower now, embraces weak,\
So I will pray for her in stealth,\
For the life of my love Mireya.

\[ \]

She was a lady from a distant land,\
Beyond Aconcagua\'s peak.\
Her time was short, she took my hand

In hers - she had no need to speak.\
She was a lady from a distant land\
Whose love was sure, embraces weak,

Whose love was true, and yes, is still\
With me deep inside, said she,\
Her living silent soul to fill.

Her lonely land was distant though,\
beyond Aconcagua\'s peak,\
I came too late, so I\'ll never more know

Her glances, the smiles I used to seek,\
The loving embraces, even though weak,\
Of the lady known by the name Mireya.

To anyone reading this poem it will be obvious that Mireya meant very
much to me. Please, however, do not imagine some kind of passionate,
tragic love affair. In fact, we only ever spent a total of three days
together spaced over several years, in two different countries,
continents really, and during only one unbroken twenty-four hour period.
So the love that existed between us, although also physical, was mostly
"spiritual". It may also be true that the brevity of our relationship
precluded the possibility of anger fits or boredom, phenomena of usual
occurrence in the best of marriages.

I have some of her many letters, which I will refrain from quoting,
because the reason for this report is not to prove or even to illustrate
the truth of the poem. In fact, the poem itself is all the evidence I
need to proceed with my thesis in good conscience.

Mireya and I could not have been more different. I was an American
businessman, she a teacher of handicapped children in a distant Latin
land. I watched her with the children and she watched me watching. I do
hate to use a corny expression like "love at first sight", so I won\'t.
However, what I felt was more like *recognition* at first sight, that
this was someone I already knew, although I had never seen her before.

A year passed before we met again, with me popping in and out from the
airport to a hotel, to business and finally to her school and her home,
for she was recovering from an operation for lung cancer.

She died when I was thousands of miles away, literally on the other side
of the world. I was not surprised for, although she seemed to be
improving when she journeyed to Switzerland and we spend those 24-hours
together with a view of Lake Geneva, I knew as did she) that lung cancer
almost always turns out badly. Not long afterward, months before we
planned to meet again in the south of that distant land, I received a
telegram from her friend, Mónica:

QUERIDO FRANK, MIREYA FALLECIO DOMINGO RESURECCION CON PESAR MONICA

(Dear Frank, Mireya passed away on Easter Sunday \[1980\]. Sadly,
Monica)

A lack of surprise in one thing, another is a feeling that our
relationship was *not* over. And yet I knew that it was over\... here,
not only in Switzerland and that distant land, but on the planet Earth.
Please don\'t think that I was expecting to meet her again in heaven
where we would be bored stiff from floating on a cloud from here to all
eternity. I believe in immortality all right, as does she (of course:
she\'s experiencing it). But not that kind. You see, I have studied the
work of Rudolf Steiner, as did Mireya. In fact, the school where she
taught was based on Steiner\'s pedagogical teaching. A fundamental
aspect of Steiner\'s thought and activity, which he called
anthroposophy, is reincarnation and karma. Now these things are almost
always associated with eastern religions and mysticism. But along came
Steiner and applied them to western philosophy, which he expounded in
many books and literally thousands of lectures (in German) which were
preserved in shorthand, then transcribed to clear script, typed, printed
and published.

The idea of reincarnation had long fascinated me, even before I
encountered Rudolf Steiner, who explained it in clear, logical, but not
abstract language. After all, what is the meaning of life if it\'s over
almost as soon as it begins, decades if you\'re lucky, much less if not.
If you need proof, take nature, which is intelligent and beautiful,
although often cruel. Well, you could say instead that nature *acts*
intelligently. (Plant growth needs rain, so it rains\...usually. It also
needs light and warmth, so the sun shines and gives warmth ... except
when it doesn\'t. Beings mutate.) I know, I know, Darwin\'s theory of
evolution sees this and much more as random, as "natural selection" -- a
contradiction in terms if I ever saw one: How can a random occurrence
"select", when selection requires at least a modicum of consideration,
which requires intelligence and even thinking? Ergo, if nature is
beautiful and true and good, then a thinking-being or beings must have
made it so. The only thinking beings we know of, however, are *human*
beings, but these beings did not create nature. Therefore, an other
thinking being or beings must exist, so intelligent and capable that
they could create nature. Now let\'s take a step beyond nature, for such
beings would hardly be satisfied with only nature and all its living
components, including insects, animals and, yes, even man. They would
also be concerned with love and compassion and justice. And the reverse
of all that.

Now I think I know that Mireya\'s suffering and early death are simply
not fair. But what, just what, if it\'s unfair for a reason or, in fact,
not really unfair?

**The meaning**

After all that, what\'s the meaning of it all? No, that´s going a bit
too far too soon. The important thing is the conclusion that there must
*be *a reason, because it´s unimaginable that such an intelligent being
(or beings) would go to all that trouble for no reason. Unless they are
playing a game. But even games have reasons for being played, like
winning or just learning to play well. So let\'s admit that we don\'t
know the reason, but insist that there must be one, or more.

When experiencing the death of a child, a gringo friend once cried:
"It\'s not fucking fair!" Although perhaps expressed differently, it\'s
hard not to agree with him. There are so many things in life that are
"not fucking fair" that one could one could easily despair. As many
have. The Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard reasoned that things are
so unfair that a real philosopher could only commit suicide -- if there
is no hope. And the only way to have hope is to have faith in God and/or
in Jesus Christ. Well, it worked for him, according to him. But with all
that science has learned since then about how things work (not why) and
the decline and corruption of the churches, it has become increasingly
difficult to have the kind of faith K advocated. That\'s where
reincarnation enters. It furnishes hope by teaching that we are all on a
path of development and that wrongs will be righted and rights will be
rewarded on the path of said development, during which freedom will be
obtained through love ... or vice versa. We should not only wonder what
happens after death, but also before birth, and so view the path of
evolution more clearly.

According to the stretchable laws of reincarnation, we have all lived
many times previously as steps on the path of development; some of us
have done well at it, others not. And we are programmed \[sic\] to live
many future lives until .... it is no longer necessary?

An important question arises, however: how to explain the population
explosion. Or rather how to accommodate population increase with
reincarnation. Where did all the seven billion inhabitants of the earth
come from if there was only a small fraction of today\'s population a
thousand years ago, or even a few hundred years ago, or -- to be extreme
-- not so long after Adam and Eve? An explanation I\'ve heard is that
conditions have changed so rapidly that it\'s necessary for most souls
to reincarnate more rapidly as well, or that there might even be new
souls.

According to the present official theory, around 13.7 billion years ago
everything we know of in the cosmos was an infinitesimal singularity --
sort of a really tiny black hole over-stuffed with stuff. Then some
unknown trigger caused it to expand and inflate in three-dimensional
space. As the immense energy of this initial expansion cooled, light
began to shine through. Eventually, the small particles began to form
into the larger pieces of matter we know today, such as galaxies, stars
and planets.

One big question with this theory: Is ours the only universe that
resulted from this "big bang"? With current technology, we are limited
to observations within this universe because the universe is curved and
we are inside the fishbowl, unable to see the outside of it (if there is
an outside.) Nevertheless, there actually is quite a bit of evidence out
there for a multiverse. And some of the biggest names in science have
taken the idea seriously. Stephen Hawking was probably the most famous
scientist who dabbled in the parallel universe question. Indeed, his
last work described a theory which reduced the quantity of possible
universes -- from infinite to reasonable, so to speak. Either way, a
smoothly running reincarnation system (cum karma) doesn\'t seem
compatible with the cosmos presently understood, as one universe or,
rather, one earth. So Isn\'t it reasonable to consider the possibility
of multiple universes, which give us more room to roam, if only -- for
the present -- as a thought experiment? What if they, all those souls,
or many of them, came from a parallel universe, or universes? That\'s
what I was thinking when I asked my old Don Roberto Fox what he thought
and, after pulling on his earlobe so hard that his hearing aid fell out,
he told me.

That was a long time ago in a vegetarian restaurant in Buenos Aires. My
office was close and I had recently decided to give up eating meat, so I
had lunch there almost every day. Roberto was also there often and we
began to nod to each other, then sat at the same table and conversed,
first with small talk, then more interesting things. He was twice my
age, but looked twice as healthy and fit. I asked him if he was a
vegetarian and he nodded. "you?" He asked. He used the informal "*tú"* 
which was all right because he was so much older. "Not sure yet," I
said, "but probably. Anyway, what an idea! Parallel universe. Don\'t the
quantum mechanics folks buy into that? I don\'t mean reincarnating
souls, but that parallel universes actual do exist?"

"Yes, some of the experts certainly do like to talk about parallel
universes existing, mathematically at least. But I don\'t think that
helps us much as far as reincarnation is concerned,"

"Why ever not, Roberto? It seems to me it does."

"Well, according to quantum mechanics the exact same things would be
happening on a parallel universe that are happening here."

"Weird, and boring."

"Right, so our parallel world, earth that is, would have to be more or
less the same physically as this one and follow the same physical laws."

"Yeah, but would we, I mean the people there, also act the same as
here?"

"Well, according to Darwinism, since the conditions are the same we\'d
pretty much act the same."

"Screw Darwinism!"

Roberto laughed. "Easier said than done. But the question is whether
quantum physics in some way explains or makes possible parallel
universes, which in turn would solve the seeming contradiction of
population explosion and reincarnation."

"You don\'t think it does."

"I do not. According to Stephen Talbott all physical scientists, in an
effort to understand reality, take their stand upon a tiny island of
knowledge, surrounded by an immense, fathomless sea of ignorance. And,
according to the celebrated physicist, Richard Feynman, \"we have no
knowledge of what energy *is.* Nor, for that matter, do we know what a
*force* is." And the same is true of all the foundational terms of
physics. *Matter*, the supposedly solid ground of material reality,
remains an enigma that has only grown more perplexing along with
advances in quantum physics."

"But," I said, knowing that I\'d be shot down, "according to quantum
theory a sub-atomic particle can be at two different places at the same
time. So, I mean, is it completely unfeasible that a universe, which is
really a huge amount of particles, be at the same place as a parallel
universe at the same time?"

"If what you call particles were more than theoretical constructs
lacking sensible qualities, perhaps."

"They\'re not?"

"I don\'t know what they are, and apparently neither does anyone else.
But I do know that they are *not* miniature bricks that you can build a
universe with. Or even a house."

I must have looked very disappointed, for he went one: "Do you like to
read novels, Frank?"

"Depends on what kind, but sure."

"Happy endings?"

"Not necessarily, but at least an ending of some kind, which isn\'t
always the case. If there\'s no real, I mean *plausible* ending it seems
unfinished."

"And unreal."

"Yeah."

"Perhaps we should treat life as an unfinished story, let\'s say an
unfinished work of art. So if someone like your Mireya, a really good
person, dies young because of a terrible disease, you consider it
unfair." I was about to interrupt, but he didn\'t allow it. "There are
also stories which are \'to be continued\'. In real life you are anxious
to know how it continues, for it affects you directly."

"You mean that reincarnation is the continuing?"

"It\'s what provides the next chapter, so to speak. If there were no
reincarnation life would remain forever unfinished."

"Okay, I\'ll buy that," I said, "but how will we know?"

"You can only know within yourself; you have to look there. And as you
know, there are millions of of galaxies out there in the universe full
of planetary systems. So maybe it\'s unnecessary to depend on a parallel
universe which might not exist when there is so much possibility within
our own."

The conversation continued for several hours more and touched other
questions of a spiritual nature, but I had learned from Roberto how to
realize that when Mireya suffered and died it was only the end of a
chapter in a real-life book about her in which I am also a character,
one who appeared late, but when it continues, we will be together, or at
least in contact, once more.

