# A Streetcar Named Karma

![Painting of a streetcar in prague](streetcar-small.jpg){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

</div>


A lecture wasn\'t exactly what I
had in mind for the evening, but there we were, Katrina and I,
approaching the hall where it was to take place. A full moon shone into
the narrow cobblestoned street. Its presence more or less guaranteed
that there would be no more snow that night.

That same day, I think it was early afternoon, I had boarded a streetcar
and found a spot among the standees, when the clasp on my briefcase
somehow opened as we rounded a sharp curve and the books and papers
tumbled out. I bent to retrieve them and fell against another standee,
knocking her over and falling almost on top of her. I stammered
apologies in German, my native tongue, instead of Czech. My reaction was
automatic, but the fact is that in that enlightened age all educated
people in Prague spoke German. Hers was lightly accented. She helped me
pick up my things, which were strewn around and soiled by the slush the
passengers\' shoes had tracked into the car. An elderly couple vacated a
double seat at the next stop and I quickly grasped the hand-guard and
invited her to sit next to the window. I took my place next to her on
the aisle. She wasn\'t a beautiful woman, at least not in the usual
sense. You could have called her attractive though. Her most salient
feature was her smile, wide and spontaneous, lighting up her face.
Though she wore a heavy fur coat against the cold, I could tell that she
was somewhat plump, which was to my taste.

The bump, the fall and the shared retrieval task had served as an
icebreaker, so I introduced myself and we talked and laughed about it
and, naturally, I invited her to join me in one of those delightful
Prague cafés for coffee and cake. But she pleaded a previous engagement,
so I asked her to go with me to the theater that evening. She blushed,
smiled, and said yes. When we reached her stop she started to get off,
but at the door she turned and said, quickly, \"No, don\'t buy the
tickets, but we\'ll meet there anyway. I\'ll explain later.\" The doors
opened and she stepped down and out. I noticed some of my fellow
passengers smirking, but I didn\'t care, I was already in love -- at
first sight, as they say. A little boy sitting on the aisle stared at me
with a fey look. I looked at him inquiringly and he turned away.

Katarina was already waiting at the theater entrance when I arrived five
minutes early. She smiled and I shivered more with expectation than from
the cold. "I\'m so sorry,\" she said, \"but I forgot an engagement for
this evening when I told you I could go to the theater.\" My heart sank,
but she continued before I could say anything. \"I\'m going there alone
though. Why don\'t you join me?\" That was more like it. I agreed of
course. \"We must hurry,\" she said. \"We don\'t want to be late.\"

\"Of course not,\" I assented, although I couldn\'t have cared less.
\"Where are we going?\"

\"To a lecture, it\'s not far from here.\"

My heart sank again or, more accurately, took a little dip, for my idea
had been the theater, then dinner with enough good German (or even
Czech) wine.  We were together though and that, although the
circumstances were different from those I had anticipated, was
sufficient to make me happy. She took my arm as we walked carefully over
the icy streets.

A poster was stuck on the door of the lecture room. It said something
about \"Spiritual Science\". My God, I thought, what have I gotten into?
Many believe that now, the beginning of the twentieth-first century, is
a materialistic age. The fact is, however, that the first quarter of the
previous century was at the apogee of materialism. Everyone believed in
natural science then, and its findings and its arrogance were
unquestioned.

The lecturer was to be a Dr. Rudolf Steiner.

The room, not very large, was almost full and there were no two seats
together. Katarina sat on the aisle and I had to sit two rows behind and
to the right of her. This arrangement was unsatisfactory of course, but
I appeased myself with the thought that I could at least observe her
profile instead of Dr. Steiner\'s pot-belly.

Exactly at the starting time he entered from a side door and stood
alongside the podium instead of behind it. \"*Sehr geehrte Damen und
Herren* \...\" A formal opening in a deeply resonant, Austrian accented
voice. I had decided to listen with at least half an ear in case she
wanted to discuss what he said afterwards, but that was impossible.
Rudolf Steiner captured one\'s attention totally. He didn\'t have a
pot-belly, by the way. He was thin, of average height for those days,
dark complexioned with pitch-black, straight hair. He was dressed in
black as well, except for a white shirt, with a frock coat and an
artist\'s black silk tie. After the formal opening he became warmer,
then, after a half-hour, very warm. He turned the world upside-down,
saying things that were completely new to me, but which I somehow
recognized as being true, as though I had always known them and was now
being reminded. He spoke of a spiritual world that was real, of the
nature of man as a spiritual being who is in a constant process of
development through many lives.

My head swam and I completely forgot Katarina\'s profile. In fact, at
one point near the end I felt I was going to faint, so profound an
effect did he and his words have on me. (Katarina told me later than
people actually did faint sometimes, which could be embarrassing if they
were sitting on an aisle. When this happened Steiner didn\'t even pause
while the unconscious body was dragged out into the fresh air.)

After it was over and the thunderous applause died out, I sat alone.
Katarina came and took my hand. I stood up and followed her out of the
hall. I suppose the cold air brought me to my senses. We went to a café
after all and I asked her about what had just happened, which was the
turning point in my life, what was left of it.

We were together on the following two evenings, and never again. I was a
lieutenant in the German army and had to leave on the third day for the
front. It was August 1914, and I, fool that I was, had volunteered to
fight for our glorious fatherland. We spent our last evening together as
lovers. I had an intuition that I would never see her again and I think
she had the same feeling. Not that I believed I\'d be killed in the war,
young men never think that until it happens.

#### Sojourn

My sojourn in the other world was so short because my life on earth had
been so brief. It is only recently that I have had the ability to see my
past life, parts of it at least, and to catch glimpses of the immediate
future. I know that Katarina is here, because she also died young, and
we will meet on a streetcar again. I\'ve concentrated to the limit of my
powers, but have not succeeded in determining where I should look.
Perhaps I shouldn\'t look, just wait for it to happen of itself like
last time. But no, things have changed and I must use my intelligence
and will -- and hope for luck, that\'s still allowed.

#### San Francisco

Luck came my way today. I switched on the TV and saw a picture of one of
those famous San Francisco cable cars. Of course. Why hadn\'t I thought
of that before? I flew to San Francisco and have been riding the cable
cars for the past week. After the first two days I decided to ride only
during rush hours -- eight to nine in the morning and five to six in the
afternoon -- when there are standees and I can be one. A problem is that
there are no curves to cause the accident. It has occurred to me that I
could be in the wrong place. Once I was in Lisbon and rode on a similar
streetcar, but with curves. It\'s probably still there. Lisbon doesn\'t
change. But my intuition tells me he\'s in America and San Francisco
seems to be the most likely place. No, \"he\" isn\'t a slip of the
tongue. I haven\'t mentioned yet that I\'m a woman in this incarnation
and Katarina is a man; should be at least, it\'s the rule.

Today it happened. During the middle of the short uphill trip a handsome
young man in an air force officer\'s uniform got on. I noticed that one
clasp of his attaché-case was open and I waited for the other one to
spring. He placed the case on the floor alongside his leg and opened a
newspaper to read. The headline read: *U.S. Ground Forces Invade Iraq*.
I decided to give karma a kick-off and nudged his attaché-case with my
foot. It fell over and the other clasp clicked open. He leaned down and
quickly picked up the case by its handle. The contents, loose papers and
two books, flew out. Just as he bent down to retrieve them the
streetcar\'s brakes squealed, he fell against me and we both went down,
me on the bottom. He helped me up, apologizing and trying frantically to
gather up his things. I looked out of the window to see what had caused
the sudden stop. The driver leaned out and yelled at a little girl to
watch where she was going or she\'d get killed. She looked at me from
the sidewalk with that familiar fey look. Then she disappeared into the
crowd. I helped him pick up his things and we sat in the seats vacated
by a gay couple. After introductions and some small talk, he asked me to
have dinner with him tonight. Naturally I accepted.

We are in a restaurant in Chinatown. He sips a glass of California wine
and tells me that he\'s an instructor at a nearby airbase, but he\'s had
no combat experience so he\'s requesting a transfer to the Middle East.
It will be good for his career. He is so happy about it, so convinced,
so foolish. Oh God, must it be a three-night stand again? Is there no
way out? If I tell him what I know about us would it help, or will he
think me mad? Behind him, on the wall, is a large mirror in which I can
see the back of his head, myself and the street through the window
behind me. My heart jumps when I see the little girl with the fey look
outside on the street staring at me in the mirror. \"No!\" I cry
silently, and put my hand over my mouth. The little girl\'s fey look
slowly relents and she smiles.

\"Is something wrong?\" he asks.

I look into his concerned eyes. \"No\", I say, \"everything\'s fine.\"
Because I know, I pray, that it will be different this time. When I look
back into the mirror I see only the back of his head, myself and the
window behind me. The little girl is gone.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

This story is available from Amazon as a booklet which is great to use
as a gift - once you\'ve reread it of course.


[A Streetcar named Karma](https://www.amazon.com/Streetcar-Named-Karma-Anthroposophical-Fantasies-ebook/dp/B0BN1XVDSK)

