# Dear Dhriti 

![](armed-teacher.jpg){class="alarge"}

## by S.F. Wright

Dear Dhriti [^1],

I am writing, as a colleague and as a friend, to ask you to return to
Voragine [^2] High School.

I understand why you left---or why you felt that you had to leave. But,
Dhriti, you must consider the fact that the world changes and that we
must adapt to its changes. Long ago, schools were gender segregated.
Now, almost all schools are coeducational. For years, teachers taught
with pencils and notebooks. Today, we use computers and Google Docs.
Once upon a time, the idea of teachers' carrying firearms in school was
not only absurd but inconceivable. As of recently, we teachers are
required to be armed during working hours.

As with the other policies, we are adjusting to this new one. And I know
that if you gave it a little time, Dhriti, you would adjust to this
change as well.

Granted, there have been some hiccups. But that is expected in any
system when a major change is implemented, especially in a system as
large, multifaceted, and interdependent as that of a school. Was it
tragic when Mrs. Gray shot herself in chemistry class with her Smith and
Wesson Model 500 and had to have half of her foot amputated? Yes. But
Mrs. Gray was hardly mobile anyway (and I'm confident that she'll love
the Rascal that the union chipped in for her), and since her accident,
the Safe-Defense Committee (on which I am a coordinator) has mandated
monthly, in-person review sessions on how to reload and clean firearms.
Was it sad when six-foot-seven Tiger Lance, while walking home from
football practice, saw Mr. Flamejante coming out of rehearsal for the
school play; as a joke, jumped in front of his Acting 101 teacher and
screamed *"Stella!"* partly in homage to, partly in parody of, the film
*A Streetcar Named Desire* (which Mr. Flamejante had showed Tiger's
class that week); and then was shot three times through the chest by a
terrified Mr. Flamejante and Mr. Flamejante's Glock G19? Of course. But
Tiger Lance's parents bear some of the blame, as the boy had an
overbearing personality that often came off as aggressive and which,
combined with his stature, made him, in my opinion, a walking target.
And was it heartbreaking when Dan Frieze reached for Ms. Frai's Sig
Sauer P365 while his first-year history teacher helped another student,
inducing Ms. Frai to yell at Dan to give the gun back, which rattled Dan
and made him, while handing the Sig Sauer P365 back, drop the gun, which
in turn caused a bullet to be discharged and travel through Ms. Frai's
skull, which then led to shards of skull, chunks of brain, and ribbons
of blood to rain not only on Dan but on his classmates? No doubt. But
our committee has obviated the likelihood of any such incident occurring
again: For not only are teachers no longer permitted to walk amongst the
students' desks, but any student who comes within ten feet of his
teacher will be automatically suspended.

The world we live is not the world of yesterday, Dhriti; you must learn
to accept that. Is the situation perfect? No; the examples above
illustrate that. But are we doing the best we can to improve the
situation every day? Definitely; and the examples demonstrate that, as
well.

We need you back, Dhriti.

You left us at a vulnerable time, when already many teachers had
resigned---and all because you could not adjust. Teaching, Dhriti, is
what you do; it is who you are; and to turn your back on that simply
because you couldn't cope with a little change (and in case you haven't
heard, not only will all schools \[private, too\] in our state be
implementing the Safe-Defense policy, but in the country) is plain
cowardice. And I know that you are not a coward.

I miss seeing you, Dhriti, interact with the students. I miss our
talking in the teacher's lounge. I also miss having classes of only 20
students! (I now average around 40, as the English department is down to
11 teachers, from 23.)

But mostly, I miss you.

I am confident that you will do the right thing.

Sincerely,

Jim Ovino [^3]

English Teacher

Voragine High School

-   

[^1]: Dhriti means fortitude; it means the capacity to hold on to
something. It is the sattavic dhrti which is strength, force and ability
that makes us hold on to noble values of life. Sattavic dhrti and
Sattvic buddhi are mutually related terms. Krishna explains to Arjuna
(Bhagavad Gita)

[^2]: voragine = maelstrom

[^3]: ovino = sheep

**S.F. Wright** lives and teaches in New Jersey. His work has appeared
in Hobart, X-R-A-Y Literary Magazine, and Elm Leaves Journal, among
other places. His short story collection, The English Teacher, is
forthcoming from Cerasus Poetry, and his website
isÂ [sfwrightwriter.com](http://sfwrightwriter.com/).
