
# What Would Real "National Defense" Look Like?

![](iron-triangle.png){class="a"}

### 13 Tasks and 3 Maxims for a Very Different Pentagon

## By [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

A progressive Pentagon? Talk about an oxymoron! The Pentagon continues
to [grow and
surge](https://tomdispatch.com/imperial-dominance-disguised-as-democratic-deterrence/)
with ever larger budgets, ever more expansive missions (for example, a
[Space Force](https://www.spaceforce.mil/) to dominate the heavens and
[yet more
bases](https://thehill.com/policy/defense/3931076-heres-where-us-military-will-open-bases-in-the-philippines-in-move-to-counter-china/)
in the Pacific to encircle China), and ever greater ambitions to
dominate everywhere, including [if
necessary](https://tomdispatch.com/peace-is-not-our-profession/) through
global thermonuclear warfare. No wonder it's so hard, to the point of
absurdity, to imagine a Pentagon that would humbly and faithfully serve
only the interests of "national defense."

Yet, as a thought experiment, why not imagine it? What would a
progressive Pentagon look like? I'm not talking about a "woke" Pentagon
that touts and celebrates its "diversity," including its belated
acceptance of LGBTQ+ members. I'm glad the Pentagon is arguably more
diverse and tolerant now than when I served in the Air Force beginning
in the early 1980s. Yet, as a [popular
meme](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/us-foreign-policy-in-one-image)
has it, painting "Black Lives Matter" and rainbow flags on B-52 bombers
doesn't make the bombs dropped any less destructive. To be specific: Was
it really a progressive milestone that the combat aircraft in last
year's [Super Bowl
flyover](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/the-militarized-super-bowl)
were operated and maintained entirely by female crews? Put differently,
are the bullets and bombs of trans Black G.I. Jane somehow more tolerant
and less deadly than cis White G.I. Joe's?

[]{#anchor}A progressive military shouldn't stop with "more Black faces
in high places," more female generals "leaning in" around conference
tables, and similar so-called triumphs for diversity. Consider Lloyd
Austin, the first Black secretary of defense, whose views and actions
have been little different from those of former Defense Secretaries
James Mattis or Donald Rumsfeld, and whose background as a retired Army
four-star general and well-paid former board member of Raytheon makes
him the very stereotype of Dwight D. Eisenhower's [military-industrial
complex](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OyBNmecVtdU&t=60s).

No, all-female air crews aren't nearly enough. Indeed, they are, I'd
argue, a form of "woke" camouflage for a predatory military leopard that
refuses to change its spots --- or curb its appetite.

A truly progressive military should start with the fundamentals. All
service members swear an oath to support and defend the Constitution,
the system of laws that defines and enshrines our vital rights and
freedoms (speech, a free press, the right to assemble, privacy, and so
on); in short, the right to live untrammeled by domineering forces. Yet,
almost by definition, that right is threatened, if not violated, by a
massive
[military-industrial-congressional](https://tomdispatch.com/can-the-military-industrial-complex-be-tamed/)
complex that penetrates nearly every domain of American life. That
complex, after all, is anti-democratic, shrouded in secrecy, and jealous
of its power, as well as fundamentally and profoundly anti-progressive.
Indeed, it's fundamentally and profoundly anti-truth.

Consider these hard facts. All too many Americans didn't know how badly
they'd been lied to about the Vietnam War until the [Pentagon
Papers](https://bracingviews.com/2016/04/07/the-vietnam-war-the-pentagon-papers-and-lying/)
emerged near the end of that disastrous conflict. All too many Americans
didn't know how badly they'd been lied to about the Afghan War until the
[Afghan War
Papers](https://bracingviews.com/2019/12/10/americas-afghan-war-lies-and-more-lies/)
emerged near the end of that disastrous conflict. All too many Americans
didn't know how badly they'd been lied to about [the Iraq
War](https://bracingviews.com/2016/04/11/lying-and-deception-in-the-iraq-war-and-today/)
until the myth of Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction (which
had been part of the bogus rationale for invading that country)
crumbled; nor did they know how badly they continued to be lied to until
the myth of the American "surge" there collapsed when the Islamic State
forces triumphed all too easily over an American-built Iraqi security
structure [that
collapsed](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-america-s-hollow-foreign-legions/)
like a rotten house of cards. Perhaps some of them didn't truly know
until a loudmouthed Republican candidate for president, Donald J. Trump,
dared to say that the Iraq War had been an unmitigated disaster, or, in
Trump-speak, "[a big fat
mistake](https://www.democracynow.org/2016/2/15/the_war_in_iraq_was_a)."
That burst of honesty helped him win the presidency in 2016. (His rival
in that election, Hillary Clinton, remained essentially the chief
spokesperson for the Pentagon.)

Yet despite the horrendous failures (and war crimes) of Vietnam,
Afghanistan, Iraq, and other U.S. military ventures of this century, no
one is ever punished! Sure, you could point to Donald Rumsfeld being
cashiered as secretary of defense amid the rubble of "the Global War on
Terror," a belated admission by the administration of President George
W. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney that the Iraq War was going
poorly indeed. Still, all those cracks were later papered over with the
myth of "the surge" and when Rumsfeld died in 2021, he would receive
remarkably [glowing
tributes](https://fair.org/home/rumsfeld-remembered-as-complex-energetic-not-as-killer-of-multitudes/)
in obituaries, as well as bipartisan salutes for his "service" to
America rather than condemnation for his numerous crimes and blunders.

The Pentagon's rampant culture of dishonesty, a cancer that above all
infects the brass, led one serving Army officer, Lieutenant Colonel
[Paul Yingling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Yingling), to write a
now-renowned (or, if you're part of the Pentagon, infamous) paper for
[Armed Forces
Journal](http://armedforcesjournal.com/a-failure-in-generalship/) in
2007 on America's failure of generalship. As he memorably noted, a U.S.
Army private suffered far more dearly for losing a rifle than America's
generals did for losing a war. The Army's response was --- no surprise
--- to change nothing, leading Yingling to [retire
early](https://captimes.com/news/opinion/column/col-paul-yingling-why-i-m-leaving-army-to-be-a-teacher/article_67ee1c0a-fc32-5480-9a3c-83d641159c83.html).

**13 Tasks for a Progressive Pentagon**

Venturing into the Pentagon's innermost corridors of power, one might be
excused for recalling Obi-Wan Kenobi's
[warning](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoRPVsN2SVM) to Luke Skywalker
in *Star Wars* as they approached the spaceport of Mos Eisley: "You
will never find a more wretched hive of scum and villainy. We must be
cautious."

How does one possibly reform such a top-heavy, self-serving, and
dishonest institution along progressive lines? A moment in Greek
mythology comes to mind: Hercules and the [Augean
Stables](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/Herakles/stables.html). Let me
nevertheless press ahead with this all too herculean task.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

[Dreaming is free](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TU3-lS_Gryk), as
Blondie once sang, so why not dream a little dream with me? Here's a
list --- a baker's dozen, in fact --- of ways a progressive Pentagon
would both exist and act far differently from America's current
regressive (and very, very aggressive) version of the same.

A progressive Pentagon would:

\* Take the lead in working to eliminate all nuclear weapons everywhere
--- that is, total nuclear disarmament --- rather than investing vast
sums in the coming decades in the U.S. nuclear arsenal. It would disavow
using nuclear weapons first ("no first use") in any conflict. It would
cancel all plans to "modernize" the current nuclear triad of missiles,
planes, and submarines at an estimated cost of [\$2
trillion](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7).
It would also immediately eliminate obsolete and vulnerable land-based
Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles, or ICBMs, and cancel as redundant
the Air Force's new [B-21 stealth
bomber](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-enabling-armageddon/).

\* Oppose sending any more of those devastating [cluster
munitions](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/praise-the-lord-and-pass-the-cluster)
or [depleted uranium](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-66736869)
tank shells to Ukraine; indeed, it would take the lead in eliminating
such awful weaponry.

\* Stop inflating threats and end all talk of a "[new Cold
War](https://tomdispatch.com/only-fools-replay-doomsday/)" with China
and Russia.

\* Celebrate the insights of Generals [Smedley
Butler](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/divesting-from-weapons) and
[Dwight D.
Eisenhower](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/dwight-eisenhower-memorial_b_1270232)
that war is fundamentally a racket (Butler) and that the
military-industrial-congressional complex poses the severest of threats
to freedom and democracy in America (President Eisenhower).

\* Reject the [language of
militarism](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-words-about-war-matter/),
including describing its troops as "warriors" and "warfighters," as
profoundly undemocratic and un-American.

\* Recognize the costs of wars already fought to those troops and ensure
full funding of the Department of Veterans Affairs, including for
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), traumatic brain injury (TBI), and
moral injuries, among the other wounds of war.

\* End the war on terror, launched just after the attacks of September
11, 2001, and urge Congress [to
repeal](https://www.commondreams.org/opinion/endless-war-after-9-11) the
open-ended war authorization it passed then with but a single dissenting
vote, because war itself is terror.

\* Refuse to go to war unless there's a formal congressional declaration
of the same as the Constitution demands. If the United States had
followed that rule, the last war we would have fought was World War II.

\* Reject its present culture of secrecy as profoundly counterproductive
to success not just in war but in general. That doesn't mean, of course,
sharing specific battle plans (of which there should be far fewer) or
detailed information about weaponry with potential enemies. It does mean
a willingness to speak truth to the American people, whose support would
be needed to prosecute any genuinely necessary war, assuming there even
is such a thing.

\* Embrace [honor and
integrity](https://tomdispatch.com/integrity-optional/) including a
willingness of the U.S. military to fall on its own sword --- that is,
take genuine responsibility for both its deeds and its misdeeds.

\* Recognize that one cannot serve both a republic and [an
empire](https://tomdispatch.com/clinging-bitterly-to-guns-and-religion/),
that a choice must be made, and that a Pentagon of the present kind in a
genuine republic would voluntarily downsize itself, while largely
dismantling its imperial infrastructure of perhaps [800 overseas
bases](https://www.amazon.com/Base-Nation-Military-Abroad-America/dp/1510728813/ref=bracingviews-20).

\* Lead the way in [demilitarizing space](https://space4peace.org/),
including eliminating America's fledgling Space Force and its
"guardians."

\* Clearly acknowledge that large, standing militaries and constant
wars, as well as preparations for more of the same, are corrosive to
democracy, liberty, and the Constitution, as America's founders
[recognized](https://bracingviews.com/2013/06/28/no-nation-can-preserve-its-freedom-in-the-midst-of-continual-warfare/).

Imagine that! A progressive Pentagon of peace rather than a regressive
one of power and unending warfare. You may say I'm a dreamer, but I'm
not the only one.

**Three Maxims for a Progressive Pentagon**

Careful readers won't be surprised to learn that I was an early *Star
Wars* fan. Naturally, I rooted for the underdog rebels against the evil
empire and its henchman, Darth Vader. I saw myself as a potential Jedi
Knight, wielding an elegant weapon, a protector of freedom and the
republic. (In my defense, I was 14 years old in 1977 when I first saw
*Star Wars*.)

Then, in 1980, I watched *The Empire Strikes Back*, just as I was
pursuing an Air Force ROTC scholarship for college. I heard Yoda, the
Jedi master, [declare to
Luke](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uyRFTcRdrIc) that "wars not make
one great." That pearl of wisdom floored me then and continues to inform
my life.

I've read my share of "heavy" philosophy and have the academic
credentials to pose as a "serious" enough thinker. Yet I come back to
the homespun wisdom captured in certain movies and TV shows that still
carries weight for me. Let me share bits of such wisdom with you.

The first is from *Kung Fu*, the 1970s TV series starring David
Carradine. As a young Kwai Chang Caine [meets Master
Po](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXfJNj9FUf8) for the first time, he
is astonished to discover that his master is blind. He takes pity on Po,
suggesting that his life must be one of endless darkness. Master Po
instantly corrects him. "Fear," he says, "is the only darkness."

The second is from *The Outlaw Josey Wales*, a classic western
starring Clint Eastwood, also from the 1970s. Josey Wales is a renegade,
a wanted man who leaves dead bodies in his wake wherever he travels. Yet
he's also tired of killing, a man in search of peace. In a [moving
scene](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pNfdii-r38g), he negotiates just
such a peace with Ten Bears, a Comanche chief, saying that there must be
a way for people to live together without butchering one another,
without constant bloodletting, without race-based hatreds.

A progressive Pentagon would recognize the deep truth of those three
maxims: that wars not make one great, that fear is the only darkness,
and that there's a better way for people to live together than
constantly butchering one another.

As a Catholic youth, I was taught that the beginning of wisdom is the
fear of God. Today, I'd put that differently. The beginning of wisdom is
the quest to master one's fear, the urge to turn away from fear-driven
hatreds, to find better, more pacific, more loving ways.

At the core of the original *Star Wars* trilogy, George Lucas
implanted a message that anger, fear, aggression, and violence --- the
"dark side" of the Force, as he put it --- should be resisted. As Darth
Vader confesses to Luke, the power of that dark side is nearly
irresistible. Fear and related negative emotions, eerily seductive as
they are, can consume our minds (and, as it turns out, given the
Pentagon budget, our taxpayer dollars as well).

Too many Americans are prey to the dark side, allowing fear to be the
mind-killer. It's not entirely our fault. From the end of World War II
until this very moment, we've been told time and again to fear --- and
fear some more. Fear the communists in Korea and Vietnam. Fear Saddam
Hussein and his weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Fear Russia and its
Hitleresque leader, Vladimir Putin. Fear China and its growing
authoritarian power. Closer to home, we're even now regularly told to
fear our neighbors, MAGA or "woke," depending on your "blue" or "red"
team allegiance.

In truth, though, fear is the true darkness. You shouldn't have to be a
Jedi master to know that wars not make one great, that the darkness of
fear (and arming ourselves against it) is a path to hell, and that
people could indeed live together without eternally slaughtering one
another. Those, then, would be my three maxims for a newly progressive
Pentagon.

To echo the words of Steven Tyler of
[Aerosmith](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89dGC8de0CA): Dream until
your dreams come true.

Copyright 2023 William J. Astore

\*\*\*

*Follow TomDispatch on* [*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on* [*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch). *Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel,* [Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel* [Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), *and
Tom Engelhardt's* [A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*as well as Alfred McCoy's* [In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*John Dower's* [The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

**William J. Astore**, a retired lieutenant colonel (USAF) and
professor of history, is
a [*TomDispatch* regular](https://tomdispatch.com/are-the-best-years-of-my-country-behind-me/) and
a senior fellow at the Eisenhower Media Network (EMN), an organization
of critical veteran military and national security professionals. His
personal substack is [*Bracing Views*](https://bracingviews.com/).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)
