![](suicide-cover.jpg){class="a"}

# The Suicide Museum

## by Ariel Dorfman

Ariel Dorfman and I have a long history together. I first
came across his work when I devoured [How to Read Donald
Duck](https://tomdispatch.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6cb39ff0b1f670c349f828c73&id=dddedf47c4&e=69000829ac),
which he and Armand Mattelart wrote in Salvador Allende's democratic,
socialist Chile. [The New England Free
Press](https://tomdispatch.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6cb39ff0b1f670c349f828c73&id=d621703df0&e=69000829ac),
where I was working as a printer, then distributed it as part of its
political literature program.  (After General Augusto Pinochet's 1973
military coup overthrew Allende and sent Dorfman into exile, the Chilean
military impounded many copies of it, [burning some of them and
throwing
others](https://tomdispatch.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6cb39ff0b1f670c349f828c73&id=910b909976&e=69000829ac) in
the ocean.) I first met Ariel in the early 1980s when I was an editor at
Pantheon Books and published his pop-cultural critique of so many of the
symbolic toys, books, and radio and TV shows of my own childhood, [The
Empire's Old Clothes: What the Lone Ranger, Babar, and Other Innocent
Heroes Do to Our
Minds](https://tomdispatch.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6cb39ff0b1f670c349f828c73&id=6a745eb3ce&e=69000829ac).
Then I
did [Widows](https://tomdispatch.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6cb39ff0b1f670c349f828c73&id=f7772db4af&e=69000829ac),
his classic novel about the disappeared (in World-War-II-era Greece,
though his own Chile was there by implication). In this century, I
began [publishing
pieces](https://tomdispatch.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6cb39ff0b1f670c349f828c73&id=9a7f1666ea&e=69000829ac) of
his at TomDispatch.

Only recently, I read his new... well, I don't quite know what to call
it... novel? In it, he's the central character and his life and events
in Chile (as well as the question of how Salvador Allende died and how,
on an ever more embattled planet, all of us may die) are at the heart of
everything. It's both a unique and uniquely gripping book, a mix of
memoir and fiction of a sort I've never seen before. Its title, no less
gripping, is [The Suicide
Museum](https://tomdispatch.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6cb39ff0b1f670c349f828c73&id=2d6b9e9200&e=69000829ac) and
its cover illustration is a stunning giant woodpecker. I won't tell you
more. I'll just say that I read every one of its more than 600 pages
with fascination and that I think you should get your hands on it, too.
Note that, in my 22 years at TomDispatch, I've never put up a
recommendation like this with a piece not written by the book's author
but by me, though on a subject that's all too central to The Suicide
Museum.

Tom Engelhardt
Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com)
