# Are We the Dinosaurs of the 21st Century?

![](engelhardt-asteroid-img.png){class="alarge"}

### And How Our Wars Distract Us

## By [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Let's admit it: We are indeed mad creatures.

This should truly have been the time of our discontent. The northern
hemisphere just experienced the [hottest
summer](https://www.npr.org/2023/09/06/1197825362/this-summer-was-the-hottest-on-record-across-the-northern-hemisphere-the-u-n-say)
in recorded history, including month by month the warmest [June, July,
August](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/21/climate/hottest-august-on-record.html),
and (by a country mile)
[September](https://time.com/6320831/september-global-temperature-record/)
ever. Staggering heat records [were
set](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/06/climate/climate-change-record-heat.html)
in place after place globally. Fires from Canada to Hawaii to Europe
broke all records. (In fact, those Canadian summer* *fires are now
threatening to [burn straight
into](https://www.reuters.com/business/environment/canadian-wildfires-could-keep-burning-through-winter-minister-2023-09-07/)
the winter months for the first time --- and I fear this phrase is going
to be become all-too-boringly repetitive --- in history.) The [southern
hemisphere](https://www.vox.com/climate/23864998/heat-wave-south-america-brazil-australia-argentina-hemisphere-winter)
had a "winter" from --- yes! --- hell. In Europe, which was burning up,
Greece
[experienced](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/05/world/europe/greece-flooding-rain.html)
unprecedented fires and floods as well. Libya had a significant part of
a major city [washed
away](https://apnews.com/article/climate-change-libya-flood-study-3eda9e77840d8bbd7058e494cc0a2231).
China, too, experienced unprecedented flooding around its capital, where
[1.2 million
people](https://thehill.com/policy/international/china/564072-12-million-displaced-by-record-flooding-in-china/)
had to be evacuated, and in [Hong
Kong](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/hong-kong-record-rainfall-flooding-black-storm-hits-rcna104025),
too. The sea ice in the Antarctic
[fell](https://apnews.com/article/antarctica-melting-ice-shelve-climate-change-1eb755e49cc229b04d4903567a51b6fc)
to the [lowest
levels](https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-66724246) (yes
again!) in recorded history, as did sea ice [in the
Arctic](https://www.statista.com/chart/19104/extend-of-arctic-sea-ice/),
helping to ensure a future in which rising sea levels could flood
coastal cities. And Greenland has been lending a hand to that same
future, starting 2023 with temperatures unmatched in [at least 1,000
years](https://www.cnn.com/2023/01/18/world/greenland-ice-sheet-warming-climate/index.html)
and still setting [new temperature
records](https://www.climate.gov/news-features/event-tracker/new-record-temperature-southwest-greenland)
in July. Worse yet, that's just to begin down a list that increasingly
seems unending.

[]{#anchor}In certain parts of my own country, the United States, this
summer was all too literally a hell on Earth and, as a *New York
Times* piece [headlined
it](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/05/us/summer-climate-change.html)
recently, also "A Summer Preview of the Future; Floods, Fires, and
Stifling Heat." (Its first line: "It felt like the opening minutes of a
disaster movie.") A stunning heat wave, for instance, stretched across a
drought-stricken Southwest all the way to California, while Phoenix,
Arizona, hit an almost unbelievable temperature record of [54
days](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/nation/phoenix-hit-110-degrees-on-54-days-in-2023-setting-another-heat-record)
of 110-degree heat or higher! (Oh, wait, make that
[55](https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix-weather/2023/09/10/phoenix-hits-new-record-55-days-of-110-plus-temperatures/70818380007/)!)

And that, of course, was just to begin down a seemingly endless list. I
haven't even mentioned [disappearing mountain
glaciers](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/12/climate/mount-rainier-glaciers-climate-change.html)
or the soaring temperatures of South Asia or the Middle East. (Iran hit
a [record heat
index](https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2023/08/09/iran-persian-gulf-extreme-heat/)
temperature of 158 degrees in August.) But let me stop there. It isn't
hard to see that, if we humans continue to use staggering amounts of
fossil fuels and so pour ever more greenhouse gasses into the atmosphere
--- and the latest study
[indicates](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/jun/08/global-greenhouse-gas-emissions-at-all-time-high-study-finds)
that they are heading in that direction at record levels --- the Earth,
or at least life as we humans have known it on this planet, will, in the
long run, almost literally go down in... what else?... flames.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

No, it's not that nothing is being done. Non-carbon-producing forms of
energy are indeed on the rise globally ([even
in](https://www.texasmonthly.com/news-politics/texas-number-one-in-renewable-and-nonrenewable-energy/)
an oil heartland like Texas). Still, to take one example, China, the
country moving most dramatically to create ever more green power, is
also [burning more
coal](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/03/business/energy-environment/china-coal-natural-gas.html)
than the rest of the planet combined and still planning to up its use of
that devastating source of energy. And keep in mind that, these days,
the [two
greatest](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/19/climate/us-china-climate-issues.html)
greenhouse-gas-producing nations, China and the United States (which is
also cumulatively by far the greatest in history), have in recent years
hardly been able to exchange a civil word, no less collaborate to try to
make this planet a cooler, better place. At the moment, it seems as if
they stand a far greater chance of [going to
war](https://tomdispatch.com/swarms-vs-swarms/) with each other (while
incinerating yet more fossil fuels and so much else in the process) than
allying to help save the planet as we know it.

Meanwhile, of course, the giant fossil-fuel companies have been making
--- I know this sounds like a broken record but what can I do? ---
[record](https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/big-oil-doubles-profits-blockbuster-2022-2023-02-08/)
(oops, sorry!) profits. And keep in mind that, in the United States, the
leaders of one of the two major political parties are wildly focused on
supporting and
[expanding](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/20/us/politics/desantis-climate-energy-biden.html)
Big Oil and carbon-producing energy sources of every kind, while
[denying](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/may/28/ron-desantis-climate-crisis-campaign)
that much of anything I've described above is actually happening. Worse
yet, according to the latest polls, their unofficial leader, Donald
Trump, stands a rather chilling (or do I mean boiling?)
[chance](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/these-new-poll-numbers-show-why-biden-and-trump-are-stuck-in-a-2024-dead-heat)
of retaking the presidency in 2024 and controlling the government for at
least four more wildly unpredictable, possibly ever more authoritarian
years of carbon hell. Under the circumstances, you might indeed be able
to kiss this planet goodbye.

**War Is Us**

And worse yet, with our increasingly dire global situation in mind, ask
yourself this: How is humanity reacting to the deep dangers we now face?
Are we focusing our attention on putting out the flames, so to speak?
I'm afraid --- despite the [heroic
efforts](https://www.sunrisemovement.org/) of any number of young people
--- the overall answer would have to be: Not on your life! Sadly enough,
instead of facing the crisis of climate change head-on, much of humanity
seems all too intent on starting fires of the kind that have defined us
since time immemorial. I have in mind, of course, a different kind of
planetary destruction entirely: war-making. In fact, sometimes that
seems to be by far our greatest, if grimmest, skill and deepest nature.

At a moment when peace couldn't be more needed so that we could focus on
our imperiled future, war (and the threat of ever more of it) seems once
again to be what we're all too willing to put at the very heart of
things, including of our news reports.

Consider war, in fact, our other version of burning the planet up. Once
upon a time, that would simply have been a metaphor for destructive war
after war after war throughout human history, but no longer. After all,
as anyone who saw the hit film *Oppenheimer *knows, back in 1945, this
country first figured out how to create a global fire that could, unlike
climate change, consume our world in essentially no time flat. I'm
thinking, of course, of nuclear weapons, and of the fact that their
power to broil us (as well as, all too ironically, drive us into a
potentially devastating [nuclear
winter](https://www.science.org/content/article/nuclear-war-would-cause-yearslong-global-famine))
has only increased immeasurably with time. The weapons in nuclear
arsenals now are generally vastly much more powerful than those two
atomic bombs that decimated the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on
August 6th and 9th of that year.

Almost 80 years later, [nine
countries](https://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/worldwide) have
nuclear weapons and the U.S. is planning, in the decades to come, to put
[up to \$2
trillion](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7)
into "modernizing" its own nuclear arsenal, with the [Russians and
Chinese](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/19/us/politics/china-nuclear-weapons-russia-arms-treaties.html)
following suit. Worse yet, lurking behind the most recent full-scale war
on planet Earth, the one in Ukraine, has been [the
possibility](https://www.cnn.com/2023/07/31/europe/medvedev-russia-nuclear-weapons-intl-hnk/index.html)
that such weaponry could actually be used on a battlefield for the first
time since 1945. I'm talking, of course, about "tactical nuclear
weapons" --- some far more powerful than the atomic bombs that took out
Hiroshima and Nagasaki --- and the Russian president's [implicit
threats](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/putin-nuclear-weapons-threat-real-biden-warns-rcna90114)
to use them.

And that bloody disaster of a conflict, launched with Vladimir Putin's
invasion in February 2022, has now become a full-scale, World War
I-style trench war (with the addition of course of so many modern
advances like drones) that shows no sign of ending in any imaginable
future. And if that war --- and other conflicts, in places ranging from
[Sudan](https://tomdispatch.com/suffering-in-the-shadows/) to
[Pakistan](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/8/17/talibans-ties-with-pakistan-fraying-amid-mounting-security-concerns)
--- weren't enough for you, then how about the now-ongoing Hamas-Israeli
nightmare in the Middle East?

*Yes, in its surprise assault on Israel, Hamas brutally slaughtered
young *[*music festival
attendees*](https://apnews.com/article/israel-palestinians-gaza-hamas-music-festival-6a55aae2375944f10ecc4c52d05f2ffe)*
in startling numbers and an unnerving number of
*[*children*](https://www.reuters.com/world/nato-ministers-shown-horrific-video-hamas-attack-2023-10-12/)*
as well, while Israel is now mercilessly battering Gaza with its trapped
two million inhabitants (*[*almost half of
them*](https://www.insider.com/children-rights-gaza-palestine-israel-human-rights-united-nations-2023-10)*
children),
*[*hitting*](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/10/world/middleeast/gaza-israel-airstrikes.html)*
schools, hospitals, and mosques, while cutting off electricity and food
which, as Senator Bernie Sanders *[*noted
recently*](https://www.sanders.senate.gov/press-releases/news-sanders-statement-on-continuing-violence-in-israel-and-gaza/)*,
is a "serious violation of international law."*

No less grimly important, that disastrous struggle has become a focus of
almost all the news shows in a way that would be inconceivable for the
long-term danger of climate change. And no one yet knows how that
conflict might still develop or spread, but consider it symbolic of so
much else that, in response to the initial Hamas surprise attacks, the
Biden administration's idea of restoring peace in a wildly
conflict-ridden Middle East was to [send
in](https://subscriber.politicopro.com/article/2023/10/u-s-may-send-second-aircraft-carrier-toward-israel-00120793)
an aircraft carrier task force and fighter planes. I mean, what else
could we do?

And mind you, even when we're not at war, the U.S. and other countries
remain all too ready to invest so much more of our wealth in our
militaries than in tamping down climate change. Yes, give Joe Biden some
credit, he did oversee the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act, which
over time will put [several hundred billion
dollars](https://www.politico.com/news/2023/08/16/biden-ira-climate-law-anniversary-00111471)
into developing a climate-change-ready economy.

Still, that could be his only major climate initiative and investment
(thanks significantly to a Republican House) in his four years in
office, while every year he's president the American military has gotten
or will get a budget of [more than \$800
billion](https://tomdispatch.com/the-ultimate-all-american-slush-fund/)
(and still rising toward the trillion-dollar mark). Similarly, when
aiding allies, as with Ukraine, we're far more likely to give them
billions of dollars for armaments and other kinds of militarized help
[(\$75
billion](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/how-much-aid-the-u-s-has-sent-to-ukraine-in-6-charts)
in the case of Ukraine) than to aid them in battling the growing
nightmares of global warming.

**Will Humanity Go Asteroidal?**

You could say that, historically speaking, as well as in the present
moment, war has been both humanity's foremost talent and our obsession,
and that we are, in some basic sense, mad creatures. War still remains a
deep and endless part of our world. Making war, in some sense, could be
considered our thing. I myself was born in the midst of the second
devastating global war of the last century and I've lived through
American wars in Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq (twice), as well
as that endless war on terror.

So, this is us. But here's what's different in this moment: while we
humans prepare for and all too regularly launch wars, this planet is now
visibly making war on us. Global warming is, in some fashion, a
slow-motion but increasingly horrifying assault on this planet as
humanity has known it these last thousands of years.

Or rather, if you want to think of it this way, humanity is now making
war on itself, using fossil fuels as its slow-motion weapon of long-term
atmospheric devastation, while distracting itself with more localized
wars on this planet. And thanks to that, it has no longer become totally
absurd to talk about our possible extinction. In a sense, you might say
that, with our own special form of brilliance, humanity has managed to
create both a devastatingly fast and a spectacularly slow way of doing
ourselves (and so much else) in. I'm talking, of course, about those
nuclear weapons and climate change. And thanks at least in part to our
inability to stop fighting wars among ourselves, we seem to be ensuring
that climate change won't be the full-scale focus of our attention as it
should be.

So, think of those nukes and climate change as fast and slow-motion
versions of [that
asteroid](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2022/10/19/tsunami-dinosaur-meteor-extinction-waves/)
that took out the dinosaurs and so much other life on Earth 66 million
years ago.

At least, however, T-Rex and its pals weren't responsible for the force
that made them history. If things don't change on this planet in the
decades to come, the same might not be true of humanity. You would, in
fact, have to say that we might have created our own asteroid, sent it
on a devastating slow-motion path to Earth, and then (to make matters
worse) largely ignored its coming and began killing each other first.

Consider all of this, then, the deepest form of human madness and just
hope that somehow, from the Middle East to Ukraine, Beijing to
Washington, we can wake up to what we're doing to ourselves before it's
too late.

Copyright 2023 Tom Engelhardt

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The
](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[Violent
American Century: War and Terror Since World War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).


Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[*TomDispatch.com*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He is also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [*The
End of Victory
Culture*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

Thanks to [https://TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)
