![](guidelines_image.jpg){class="alarge" style="max-height:100%"}

# Anthroposophical Guidelines

## by Rudolf Steiner

*These Guidelines were written from February 1924 through March 1925.\
Rudolf Steiner died on March 30, 1925*

Translated by Frank Thomas Smith

### Guidelines 1 - 4

1\. Anthroposophy is a path of knowledge which guides the spiritual in
the human being to the spiritual in the cosmos. It manifests as a
necessity of the heart and feeling. It must find its justification in
being able to satisfy this need. Only those who find in anthroposophy
what they seek in this respect can appreciate it. Therefore only those
who feel certain questions about the nature of man and the world as
basic necessities of life, like hunger and thirst, can be
anthroposophists.

2\. Anthroposophy imparts knowledge obtained by spiritual means. Yet it
only does this because everyday life and a science dependent only upon
sense perception and intellectual activity lead to a boundary where the
human being's soul must wither if it cannot cross. This everyday life
and this science do not lead to the boundary in a way that one is
prevented from crossing it; rather at this boundary of sense perception
the view of the spiritual world is revealed by the soul itself.

3\. Some people think that all insights end at the boundaries of sense
perception. If they were attentive to how they become conscious of these
boundaries, they would also find in this very consciousness the capacity
to transcend these boundaries. A fish swims to the boundaries of water;
it must go back because it lacks the physical organs to live out of
water. Man arrives at the boundaries of sense perception; he can realize
that on the way there sufficient strength of soul has been acquired to
live in the elements which are not limited by sense perception.


4\. Man requires knowledge of the spiritual world for security in his
feelings and for the healthy development of his will. Then he can sense
to a large extent the greatness, beauty and wisdom of the natural world.
The latter does not, however, answer the questions about his own being.
This being holds the matter and forces of the natural world together in
the living human bodily form only until the person crosses the threshold
of death. At that point nature takes over the form. It cannot hold it
together, only tear it apart. Great, beautiful, wisdom-filled Nature may
answer the question of how the human form disintegrates, but not how it
is held together. No theoretical objection can erase this question from
the sensitive human soul if it does not wish to deceive itself. Its
presence must ceaselessly maintain the desire for spiritual paths to
knowledge of the cosmos in every human soul which is truly awake.

To be continued.

[This book](https://www.amazon.com/Anthroposophical-Guidelines-Rudolf-Steiner/dp/1948302411) is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle.
