![](love-life-spies-cover.jpg){style="max-height:100%; max-width: 200px" class="alarge"}

### Chapters 6 & 7

**Camp King, Oberursel, West Germany**

Second Lt. Marvin Jacks tied his sneaker shoelaces and stood up. He
heard basketball sounds coming from the gym: hard bounces on a wooden
floor, the clang when the ball hit the rim, a whumpf when it went
through cleanly. Shouts of triumph or despair. He looked at himself in
the locker- room mirror and smiled with satisfaction. Smiling back at
him was a young handsome face, the only imperfection on it being a
slightly bent nose broken in a street fight during adolescence. He\'d
never had it straightened because it provided the manly touch his
baby-face needed if he was to be taken seriously. He was only slightly
above average height, too small for basketball, at least for the
professional sort.

He opened the door to the gym and was surprised to see one person,
playing by himself, in the act of sinking a jump shot. He retrieved the
ball and said \"Hi\" to Jacks.

\"Hi. I thought there\'d be two complete teams in here, judging by the
noise,\" Jacks said with a smile.

\"Yeah. I like to make it sound realistic. No fun otherwise.\" He
trotted over and offered his hand. He was about Jacks\' height but
heavier. \"Jack Quinn. You\'re new, I guess.\"

\"Marvin Jacks. Yeah, just got in.\"

\"Welcome to Spook\'s Paradise.\" He flipped the ball to Jacks and
stationed himself under the basket. Jacks was conscious of the dramatic
effect a basket on first try would make. He bounced the ball twice,
drifted to the center of the court and let loose a long jumper that
bounced vertically off the rim, touched the backboard and went in.

\"Good shot.\"

\"Lucky.\"

\"Same difference.\"

They spent the next fifteen minutes dribbling, passing behind their
backs and shooting with uncanny accuracy. An observer would have thought
they\'d been playing together for years.

\"You from New York?\" Jacks asked, knowing he was because the accent
was unmistakable.

\"Sure. You too, I bet.\"

\"Brooklyn.\"

\"No kidding. What part?\"

\"Flatbush. What other part is there?\"

\"Bensonhurst, that\'s what other part.\"

\"You play good ball,\" Jacks said as he missed a jumper. \"Who\'d you
play for?\"

\"Playground ball. You?\"

\"Erasmus High.\"

\"Good teams.\" Quinn drove in, feinted at nobody, glided under the
basket and sunk a twisting left-hander. He retrieved the ball and placed
it under his arm, a gesture that indicated that the conversation would
get serious. \"Play any baseball, Marvin?\"

\"A little, nothing to speak of.\"

\"That's OK, you\'re a good athlete. I can shape you up.\"

\"What do you mean?\" Jacks asked, wiping the sweat off his face with
his arm.

\"I mean this here\'s an Military Intelligence unit," Quinn said, "but
it\'s also a jockstrap outfit.\"

\"No kidding?\"

\"Sure. The old man\'s a sports nut, played for Georgia Tech. Don\'t see
how myself. His best, let\'s say his only shot, is a hooker. I mean
Jesus, that went out with Ebbets Field.\"

\"Unless you happen to be seven feet tall.\"

"Which he ain\'t. Comes in to work out most every day when he\'s here.\"
As if to emphasize what he would say next, Quinn dribbled the ball
between his legs, gave it a kick-flip with his toe and caught it.

\"What I\'m saying, Marvin, is that you could spend your whole tour
right here in Camp King just playing basketball and baseball. No
football, not enough jocks and anyway the equipment\'s too expensive.\"
He sighed at that misfortune. \"It\'s a great place, food\'s fantastic,
Frankfurt\'s a half-hour away on the trolley, nothing to do but play
ball.\"

\"Nothing?\"

\"A little interrogating if you don't object. Basketball in the fall and
winter, baseball in the spring and summer. That\'s all. We\'re in the
service units league. Bunch of beer-bellies. We win everything. Just say
the word. I coach both teams.\"

The locker-room door opened and a man walked onto the floor in gym
clothes. \"Hey, I thought no one was here. Didn\'t hear anything.\"

\"Howya doin\' sir? We were just takin\' a break,\" Quinn said. \"Who
are you?\" he asked Marvin.

\"Jacks, sir. Arrived today.\"

\"Oh yeah.\" He stood in the key and Quinn passed him the ball as he
moved to his left. He hooked it high off the backboard into the basket.

\"Good shot,\" Quinn cried.

\"Sure haven\'t lost the old touch.\"

Colonel Moultrie Banks, Commanding Officer of the 509th M.I. Unit,
wasn\'t exactly as old as the hills. He was forty-five, tall and once
lanky, red- nosed and high-voiced and came from Moultrie, Georgia, which
one of his ancestors founded during the eighteenth century. The three of
them tossed the ball around a while, until Banks began to huff and puff
and the sweat poured off him in streams.

\"See you guys,\" he said and disappeared into the locker-room.

\"See what I mean?\" Quinn winked. \"Think about it and let me know.
What barracks are you in?\"

\"BOQ,\" Jacks said. From the look of surprise on Quinn's face, it was
obvious he hadn't known that Jacks was an officer. He knew exactly what
Jack Quinn was thinking because he\'d have been thinking it himself if
the roles had been reversed: Why didn\'t you tell me you were a fucking
officer? But all Quinn said was \"Oh\". Then, \"See ya,\" and he went
into the locker-room leaving Marvin Jacks alone feeling like a traitor,
which in a sense he was.

When the Vietnam War broke out he had already been influenced by the
romanticism of books like *From Here To Eternity* and movies like *Paths
of Glory,* which depicted officers as an arrogant, selfish, privileged
class of incompetent parasites who did not hesitate to send soldiers to
certain death for no purpose other than their own aggrandizement.

What changed in the Language School at Monterey was his perception of
moral necessity. While his comrades from basic training were being
killed and wounded in Vietnam he had become one of the privileged ones
-- still a Private, true, but in a university atmosphere getting an
education for which he was being paid. Most of the students were
enlisted men, but the few officers were enveloped by enhanced privilege.
They were paid much more, had new or nearly new cars and were treated
almost as equals by the aristocratic staff of Russian teachers, who
invited them to their homes, something a mere soldier could never attain
to.

Marvin saw all this, but combined with resentment he felt envy. He began
to like army life. He was part of a great family, the members of which
were fed, clothed, housed and paid without having to work. The
possibility of being wounded or killed in a war was always present of
course, but he had been able to avoid that so far.

Halfway through his one-year Russian course he applied for OCS. Again,
to his surprise he was accepted and attended the Officers Candidate
School at Fort Benning, Georgia after Language School, for six months,
still not long enough for the war in Vietnam to have ended. But there
was still the Cold War. So he was sent off to Germany and still another
school, the Intelligence and Military Police School in Oberammergau,
Bavaria, where he was supposed to learn how to be a spy. It was only a
three-week course and amateurish. The only thing he remembered from it
was how to conduct surveillance and a two-day long course in German
history, given by a Master Sergeant who really knew his stuff. Jacks
wondered what the hell he was doing in the army, and as an Enlisted Man.
He could have become an officer but probably didn\'t want to, for which
Jacks admired him more than for his historical erudition.

Chapter Seven

Lieutenant Jacks reported to his Commanding Officer, Colonel G. Moultrie
Banks, on the day after his arrival at Camp King.

\"Just get in, Lieutenant?\" Banks asked, reading his personal file.
\"Yesterday, sir. We sort of met at the gym yesterday.\"

He looked up at Jacks and frowned. \"Oh yes. I thought you were a friend
of Quinn's.\"

\"No, sir. Never saw him before.\"

\"Good ball player, Quinn.\"

\"Yes, sir.\"

\"Sit down.\" Jacks sat down. \"You\'re pretty good yourself.\"

\"I could say the same for you, sir.\" It was the right thing to say. In
fact, if Marvin hadn\'t used exactly those words at exactly that time
and in that place and in that admiring but matter-of-fact manner, his
whole life might have been different.

The Colonel smiled modestly. \"Oh, I used to be pretty good, had a great
hook shot if I do say so myself.\" He entered into a long account of his
basketball prowess at Georgia Tech. \"I don\'t regret turning down that
pro offer because that\'s about when the really big guys came along and
my hook-shot wouldn\'t\'ve stood a snowball\'s chance in hell against
them.\"

Marvin didn\'t dispute it. He waited.

Banks looked down again at his file. \"My problem now is what the hell
to do with you, Jacks.\"

\"Sir?\"

\"I see you\'re a Russian linguist. Three fluents. \"Yes, sir.\"

\"Do you have any suggestions as to what we\'re supposed to do with
another Russian linguist around here?\"

\"Well\...no, sir.\"

\"Of course you don\'t. Are you expecting a war with Russia any time
soon?\"

\"Not really.\"

\"Neither am I. Of course we\'ve got the shit squad, but there\'s
already a Major and two Captains there who do nothing and three
naturalized Russian Enlisted Men who do the work.\"

\"The shit squad, sir?\" Jacks asked, worried.

\"We got spies who steal the garbage from the Russian garrisons in East
Germany and send the papers to us by the truckload. And the Russians use
anything they can get to wipe their asses with\...get the point? But at
least it\'s dry shit. So our shit squad reviews these\...documents, we
call them\... for potential intelligence data. Ninety-nine per cent of
it is shit, love letters, pleas to Mom to send food, and so forth. Every
once in a great while something of remote intelligence value is found.
Get the point?\"

\"Yes, sir,\" Marvin replied, more worried.

\"Is that what you\'d like to do?\"

\"Not really, sir.\" A spark of hope. Was he being given a choice?

\"Would you like to infiltrate the Soviet Union?\"

\"Well, I speak fluent Russian, but I don\'t think I\'d pass for a
Russian. No, I don\'t think there\'d be much point in that, sir.\"
Worried again, very worried.

\"No. But they keep sending me Russian linguists. Get the point?\"

\"Yes, sir.\"

\"Do you know what I need?\"

\"German linguists, sir?\"

\"Right, by God\". He lit a cigarette and offered one to Marvin, who
accepted it. \"I knew you had a head on your shoulders. Do you know
why?\"

\"I\'d rather pass on that one, sir, as I don\'t know much about the
operation yet. Except to say that we *are* in Germany, after all.\"

Banks grinned. \"It\'s really obvious, isn\'t it? This here\'s an
interrogation center. We get a Russian once in a blue moon and we get to
keep him about two days before the CIA comes and grabs him. But we get
loads of Germans: Volkspolizei, politicians, spies, double agents,
phonies, the works. So they send me Russian linguists. I get some
Germans, linguists I mean, but most aren\'t up to the job. Do you know
why?\"

\"No, sir.\"

\"No balls.\" He waited for a reaction, but Jacks was impassive, feeling
that was the appropriate stance for someone with balls. \"They can be
interrogators, but do you know what I really need?\"

Jacks could tell that the Colonel was an experienced interrogator. \"No,
sir\".

\"Recruiters. Do you know what they do?\"

\"More or less. They mentioned the subject in Oberammergau.\"

\"Yeah. Well, you gotta be able to drink beer and talk soccer to Germans
to gain their confidence. Do you do those things?\"

\"Yes, sir,\" which was half a lie. He drank beer, who doesn\'t? But
talk soccer, who does?

\"Goddamn,\" Colonel Banks exclaimed. \"You play soccer?\"

\"Used to. Not too much, but I could hold my own.\"

\"Where?\"

\"High school.\" A lie, he\'d never played soccer in his life and
didn\'t know the first thing about it. He resolved to get a book on the
game first thing if he got out of this interview without the Colonel
asking technical questions and finding him out.

\"Well, waddaya know. Can\'t stand the thing myself. Sorta sissy game,
don\'t you think?\"

\"Not really, sir. Of course it\'s not football, but it can be rough and
you have to be in good shape\". Couldn\'t be anything wrong in that, he
thought. Colonel Banks sighed. \"I guess you\'re right. The Germans
aren\'t exactly pansies and they go for it big\".

Jacks nodded wisely.

\"You\'d make a good recruiter, Jacks, but you don\'t speak German, do
you?\"

\"As a matter of fact I do, sir.\"

Banks opened his eyes wide. \"You do? Where'd you learn German?"

"From my mother. She was German."

"Well, I'll be dollgarned. Read and write it too?

"Not as well as speaking. But yes, though I make mistakes writing."

"Who the hell doesn't? How come that's not in your records?"

"Don't know, sir. I guess because they never asked."

"Son, you have come to the right place. What do you know about
interrogation?"

"What they taught us in Russian at the Language School. I guess the
technique's the same for German."

"Yes, well, what they taught you and the reality aren't exactly the
same. But practice makes perfect, just like in basketball."

\"Right, sir.\"

"You can observe interrogations for a while, then do some easy ones on
your own. Meantime tell Quinn to set you up for the basketball team.
Play baseball too?"

"Some, Sir."

"OK, glad to have you aboard, Jacks."

\"That\'s good of you, sir.\" He was saying all the right things, he
realized. Robert E. Pruitt of *From Here to Eternity* would act
differently. Well, you have to watch your own ass in the real world.

Marvin Jacks was ebullient. He went to the Officers\' Club because he
was passing it and was thirsty after that throat-drying interview with
Col. Moultrie Banks. It had been the German Officers\' Club before the
Americans took it over and it was opulent. Marvin passed an empty
reading room and entered the bar. There was only one early bird in
civilian clothes perched on a bar-stool reading *Stars and Stripes.*
Marvin did a double take: it was Jack Quinn. So he was an officer after
all. What had made Marvin discount that possibility? Something straight,
honest, unhypocritical about him? He was relieved and at the same time
somehow disappointed. He approached smiling and said, \"Hi, Jack.\"
Quinn turned his head sideways, saw who it was, said \"Hi\", and resumed
reading. A brush off.

"How\'s everything, Jack?\"

Quinn looked at him stonily. \"Look, top grade enlisted men can use the
officers\' club on this base, which I don\'t normally do. I\'m waiting
for Colonel Banks, who wants to talk to me about the sports program and
this is his favorite place. That\'s just in case you\'re wondering what
I\'m doing here or in case you might confuse me with an officer.\"

Marvin ordered a beer and tried to think of what to say. It would be
stupid to apologize, he had nothing to apologize for, rather it was
Quinn who was being rude. Better be matter-of-fact.

\"What rank are you, anyway?\"

Without looking up from his paper, Quinn answered, \"Master Sergeant.\"

That\'s who he reminded him of: the Master Sergeant Burt Lancaster
played in *From Here To Eternity*. He despised officers, too. \"You\'re
pretty young to be a Master Sergeant,\" Marvin said.

Quinn sighed and closed the paper in a show of resignation. \"Thank
Vietnam,\" he said, \"in case you\'ve heard of it. Rank comes fast there
if you stay long enough.\"

\"How long were you there?\"

\"Long enough.\" Then, to the German barman, \"*Noch ein Bier, Hans,
bitte*.\"

\"Do you speak German?\"

\"Everyone learns to order another beer after three days here. But as a
matter of fact I do. That\'s why I\'m in this outfit.\"

\"Language school?\"

\"No, my old lady."

\"German speakers being in such short supply," Jacks said, "I\'m
surprised you aren\'t employed differently\".

\"I told you, Colonel Banks is a sports nut. Look, Jacks, I shot off my
mouth yesterday about all that thinking you were\...not knowing what you
were. I\'d appreciate your keeping it to yourself\".

He talks to me as though he were the colonel, Marvin thought, but
that\'s the way Master Sergeants are. \"No problem,\" he said. "By the
way, Colonel Banks told me to tell you to set me up for the basketball
team."

\"Wow, good for you. You must have made a big hit with the old man. And
it takes an expert ass-kisser to do that.\"

Nasty. \"You seem to be pretty good at it yourself,\" Marvin retorted,
giving up the attempt to be friendly, let alone make friends.

But he didn\'t know Jack Quinn, who frowned, then grinned. \"The only
genuine, successful ass-kissers in this man\'s army are officers, of
which select group you are one. But maybe you\'re different. After all,
you *are* from Brooklyn, so you can\'t be all bad\".

Colonel Banks clapped Quinn on the shoulder. \"Hello, Jack.\" He ignored
Marvin Jacks.

\"Hi, Colonel,\" Quinn greeted him. Marvin picked up his beer, mumbled
an apology and slunk off. They didn\'t hear him.

To be continued.

[Chapter 5](/153/love-spies-5.html)

This book may be purchased from Amazon.com in paperback or kindle: [Love in the Life of Spies](https://www.amazon.com/Love-Spies-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/1948302519)
