# The Magic Mound

![](magic-mound-cover.png){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 8

### Platero, the marvelous White Donkey

Queen Mamara and Mara were exceedingly pleased when, the next morning,
Sergio told them that he and his brother were willing to undertake
Mireya\'s rescue. When Sergio asked how they were to find her, Mamara
pointed in the direction behind the palace and said, \"Go that way,\" as
though expecting them to simply start walking until they bumped into
Mireya. Sergio had the impression that Maxanians were more like children
than he or his little brother.

\"But we\'ll need more exact directions than that,\" he protested.

\"I drew you a map,\" Mamara said.

\"But you kept it.\"

\"Did I? Don\'t you remember it?\"

\"Not exactly.\"

\"Very well then, I\'ll make you another.\" She clapped for the
attendant and soon had drawn a new parchment map, which she handed to
Sergio. The magic mound was not on it. Sergio decided not to mention it
for fear that she would think they were intent on escaping.

\"Where exactly in Maxalabora are Alaram and his men?\" he asked,
perusing the map.

\"I don\'t know,\" Mamara answered. \"None of us has ever been there and
I couldn\'t tell from the dream where they are because he hid that from
me. Perhaps they are in the south.

\"And the other bridge, Westbridge, did Alaram build it as well?\"

\"I don\'t know who built it, but it is there,\" she answered, annoyed.

Sergio wasn\'t so sure. \"Did you see it in a dream?\" he asked.

\"Yes, of course.\"

All this didn\'t surprise Divino in the least, but Sergio, being older,
knew that dreams were not all that trustworthy, and was doubtful. He was
even beginning to regret his decision to rescue Mireya.

\"Perhaps you will have a dream on the way which will show you where
Mireya is,\" Mara suggested, but Sergio did not consider it very
helpful.

\"We\'ll need provisions,\" he said.

\"What is that?\" Mamara asked.

\"Food and warm clothing and strong shoes.\"

\"Whatever for?\"

\"It\'s mountainous in Urmaxa, so it must be cold,\" Sergio explained,
\"and fruit doesn\'t fall from the trees there as it does there.\"

\"There are berries in Urmaxa, except where it\'s very high, and there
you don\'t have to eat all the time.\"

\"Remember mother,\" Mara broke in, \"Mireya always had to eat. She said
she became weak if she did not eat three times a day. These boys are
from the same country as Mireya, so they must have to eat all the time
just as she does.\"

\"Yes, I forgot about that,\" the queen said.

\"Do you have horses?\" Sergio asked.

Mara looked worried. \"No,\" she said, \"we have a donkey, but you
can\'t eat him.\"

Divino was horrified. \"We don\'t want to eat him.\"

\"No,\" Sergio explained, \"but he could carry our provisions.\"

\"What a clever idea,\" Mamara exclaimed.

\"Can we see him?\" Sergio asked.

\"If you like. Call him, Mara.\" Mara cupped her hands around her mouth
and whistled - three short peeps. For a while nothing happened. Then a
small white donkey came running out of the forest. When it saw the
strange boys it stopped in its tracks and hung its head.

\"Come here, Platero,\" Mamara called.

The donkey approached them slowly. First he sniffed Sergio, then Divino,
who reached out to touch his head. The donkey butted him in the chest
and Divino was so surprised that he fell over. The others laughed.

\"He looks strong,\" Sergio said.

\"He is strong all right,\" Mamara agreed, \"and fresh and good for
nothing except eating.\"

\"Do you ride on him?\" Divino, brushing himself off, asked.

\"You have the strangest ideas, just like Mireya,\" Mamara said. \"First
you want him to carry things, then you want to ride on him. Mireya
sometimes rode on him, but she never had him carry things.\"

\"May we take him with us,\" Sergio asked the queen.

\"Take him if you wish, but I don\'t think he\'ll like it if you try to
ride on him.\"

\"That\'s all right, we need him more to carry the provisions. And his
name is Platero?\"

\"Yes,\" Mamara answered, \"Mireya gave him that name.\"

\"It\'s a good name,\" Sergio said. They had read a book by a Spanish
poet in the little school about a white donkey called Platero, and
Sergio had liked it very much.

When the boys had finished admiring Platero, Sergio asked Mamara how
long it would take them to get to Maxalabora.

\"That depends on you,\" Mamara said. Sergio was getting used to the
fact that Maxanians think differently than him. He did not insist.

\"Is there any place where we can cross directly from Maxanatara into
Maxalabora?\"

\"No, I told you, the river is too wide and too swift. You must go to
the Eastbridge, cross into Urmaxa, then go over to the Westbridge.\"

\"Perhaps Mara could show us the way to the Eastbridge,\" Sergio said.

\"Why?\" Mamara said. \"It you go that way\" - she pointed to the place
in the forest from where Platero had emerged - \"you will eventually
reach the river and the Eastbridge.\"

\"Still, it would be better with a guide in order to save time,\" Sergio
insisted.

\"Save time! How do you do that?\" Mara asked.

\"Never mind,\" Mamara said petulantly, \"If they want to save time, let
them.\"

\"And we will need warm clothes for the mountains of Urmaxa.\"

\"You can wear our tararobes. They are cool when it is warm and warm
when it is cold.\"

Sergio was not convinced, but he sensed that it was useless to argue
with Mamara on this point.

\"When will you leave?\" she asked him.

\"Tomorrow,\" Sergio replied, \"if we can have everything ready by
then.\"

\"Good.\" Queen Mamara smiled at the boys. \"Mara will arrange for
everything you want and will accompany you as far as the Eastbridge. But
she may not cross into Urmaxa. The God might be angry.\"

\"Won\'t he be angry at *us?*\" Divino asked.

\"Why should he be. You are not Maxanians and have not disobeyed him.
Why, he is not even your god.\" Suddenly she rose from her chair.
\"Goodbye. I will see you again when you return with Mireya.\" She
placed her hands on Sergio\'s shoulders and solemnly touched his
forehead with her own. She turned to Divino and did the same to him.
Then she walked quickly into the palace.

### Chapter 9

### Tararobes and the Quest

\"Do you have pants for us?\" Sergio asked Mara.

\"What are pants?\"

He pointed to his jeans: \"Like these.\"

\"No,\" Mara said, \"we only have tararobes. Why do you want pants when
tararobes are much prettier and more comfortable?\"

\"Our legs might get cold and it would be good to have an extra pair.\"
The boys didn\'t want to wear dresses either, which only girls wear in
Brazil.

\"Tararobes keep your legs warm as well, even though they do not
completely cover them,\" Mara insisted.

\"We have never worn tararobes, Mara,\" Sergio said.

\"No, of course not. Come with me and I will find some to fit you. She
headed for the palace and the boys followed her. Platero stood alone for
a moment as though thinking, then followed them into the palace.

\"And two blankets each,\" Sergio said to Mara once they were in the
palace.

\"To sleep on? Yes, that\'s a good idea. Now I see why you want the
donkey with you - to carry all the things you want.

\"Platero,\" Divino corrected.

\"Platero.\" She led them into the storage room, where she selected two
light-blue tararobes and handed them to the boys. \"Here, try these
on,\" she said, \"but take off those pants. They are of a different
material and the tararobes do not like that.\"

The boys looked at each other, then at Mara, who stood with her hands on
her hips obviously not intending to leave while they changed. Finally
Sergio shrugged, undressed and slipped the tararobe over his head.
Divino did the same. The robes felt wonderfully soft against their
bodies. Mara took two silver-toned cords from a hook and gave one to
each of the boys.

\"If you feel cold in the mountains, tie a tara-belt around your waist
and you will be warm.\" Then she gave them blue slippers similar to the
ones she was wearing. They took off their sneakers and put on the
slippers. \"They\'re very light,\" Sergio said doubtfully.

\"Yes, and much prettier than those things you were wearing.\" She
glanced distastefully at the discarded sneakers.

\"Now we would like another set of everything,\" Sergio said.

Mara was puzzled at first, then she went to another closet and took out
two red-toned tararobes and two pairs of slippers. \"It\'s terribly
boring to wear the same colors all the time,\" she said. Sergio was not
thinking of the colors, he only wanted a change of clothes, but he felt
no need to explain this to Mara.

\"What about Platero?\" Divino said.

Mara laughed. \"I don\'t have a tararobe to fit him, but he can have a
silver cord for when he gets cold.\" She tied a silver cord around
Platero\'s neck.

\"He\'s not cold now,\" Divino protested.

\"No, but see how fine he looks.\"

Platero shook himself, obviously pleased with his new necklace. Sergio
asked Mara if a needle and thread were available and she led them,
followed by Platero, to a dressmaking shop where a group of girls were
busy making and repairing tararobes, tablecloths, curtains and other
articles which the boys did not recognize. At Mara\'s request one of the
girls gave Sergio a sewing needle made from a hard thorn, thread and
some tararobe material.

He sat at one of the benches and began to make saddle-bags. No one did
any work until he finished about an hour later, so intent were they on
watching Sergio\'s fingers fly and curious about what he was making.
Both Sergio and Divino had learned to sew at the little school, for Dona
Ute insisted that boys as well as girls learn to sew and cook.

When Sergio finished he proudly held up the saddle-bags for the
admiration he felt was their due.

\"What is it?\" one of the girls asked. Sergio tried to explain, but
they didn\'t understand. He looked around for Platero, but the donkey
had long since grown bored and had gone outside for some fresh air. They
all followed Sergio outside to where Platero was enjoying his nap,
standing up as donkey do. He sensed the group approaching and woke up.
Thinking it was some kind of game, he backed away and shook his head.

\"Look at the pretty saddle-bags I made for you, Platero,\" Sergio said,
holding out the bags.

Platero was somewhat vain and fond of adornments, so he went right up to
Sergio, who placed the bags, which were attached to each other by a
strong piece of tara-cloth, over his back and arranged them so they hung
evenly on either side.

\"Oh, I see now,\" Mara exclaimed. \"What a clever idea!\"

\"I could ride on Platero, I bet,\" said Divino, wanting some attention
for himself. \"Watch!\" He put his hand on Platero\'s back and slid up
in one smooth motion the way Brazilian gouchos slide onto their horses.
He had learned to do this when he was very small before moving to Sao
Paulo. Platero shook his head, turned in a circle and suddenly bolted
forward, almost throwing his rider off. Divino was a good rider though,
and soon regained his balance. \"See how easy it is, Platero?\" He
patted the donkeys head and touched his sides lightly with his heels.
Platero trotted around the garden for a minute or two and seemed to be
enjoying it. The girls laughed and clapped their hands. Finally Divino
pulled on Platero\'s mane and he stopped. Divino slid off and kissed
Platero on the nose. \"You\'re a fine donkey, Platero,\" he said.

At sunrise the next day the boys were ready to start on their quest to
rescue Mireya. Dressed in their new blue tararobes and with Platero
between them bearing his saddle-bags, they waited impatiently for Mara.

\"Maybe she\'s still sleeping,\" Divino said, yawning and wishing he
were still in his hammock as well.

\"We agreed to start at dawn,\" Sergio said. \"She promised to be
here.\"

\"I\'ll go call her,\" Divino offered.

\"No, you\'ll wake up everyone and then we\'ll never get started.\"

The sun, rising quickly on the eastern horizon, was still hidden from
view by the forest. Suddenly it reached a point just below the tree-tops
and shone splendidly through the upper branches onto the palace, bathing
it in greenish-red light. The palace\'s interior awoke and sprang into
life. Fifteen minutes later Mara emerged followed by a crowd of
girl-women. They were still munching their breakfast cakes.

\"Have you eaten already? she asked the boys.

\"Yes,\" Sergio answered, not trying to hide his annoyance, \"long ago.
We\'ve been waiting for you.\"

\"You said we would leave at dawn.\"

\"Yes.\"

\"Well, it is dawn.\"

Sergio realized that for Mara dawn was when the sun\'s rays touched the
palace, whereas for him it was when it started to get light. \"It
doesn\'t matter,\" he said. \"Let\'s go.\"

They waved to the chattering girls and started forward, but Platero
didn\'t move. Come on, Platero,\" Divino said, but the donkey stood his
ground. Mara put her finger through the silver cord around his neck and
gently pulled him. He stamped his hind legs, shook himself as though to
say \"All right, but just don\'t take me for granted,\" and followed
her.

\"Platero can be stubborn when he wants to be,\" Mara explained. He
understands a lot and knows this will be a long journey. Besides, it\'s
early and he likes to sleep late.\"

They entered the forest with Mara leading the way, followed by Platero,
then Sergio, and Divino went last. Queen Mamara did not leave the palace
to see them off, but she watched their departure from her window on the
top floor of the palace.

Continued in the next issue

[Chapters 6 & 7](https://southerncrossreview.org/150/magic-mound-5.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle:

[The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)

and in Spanish at:

[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)

