# Esoteric Cosmology -- 3

![](big-bang.jpg){class="a"}

## By Rudolf Steiner

Translation: Frank Thomas Smith

*This is the third of three lectures given in the Berlin branch of the
Theosophical Society in 1904. Rudolf Steiner was the general secretary
of the German Theosophical Society until he broke with the Theosophists
in 1913 and formed the Anthroposophical Society. At that time Steiner
used theosophical terminology derived from oriental sources. He later
abandoned most of these terms in favor of German. This lecture was
published in German by the Rudolf Steiner Verlag, Dornach, Switzerland,
in 2001. It is based on notes taken by participants, none of whom was a
professional stenographer. This is the only English translation to my
knowledge. \[FTS\]*


9 June 1904, Berlin (GA 89)

A week ago, I tried to explain the manner of thinking, so strange to
western minds, through which the theosophist attains his insights and
knowledge of the cosmos. The sketchy character these lectures
necessarily have prevents me from delving more profoundly into
theosophical cosmology. Nevertheless, I will attempt today to give you
at least a picture in descriptive form of the origin of the world based
on Theosophy. I beg those who have scientific bents to bear in mind that
in the course of three short lectures it isn\'t possible to go into
scientific explanations of what I will say today. These scientific
explanations will be included in a subsequent lecture cycle, in which I
will speak in more detail about this subject. Also, in the second volume
of my *Theosophy*, which will soon be published, cosmology will be
discussed.

Allow me first of all to mention an important thought, which is
basically very simple, but which must be clear to whoever wishes to
understand evolution in the theosophical sense. When we speak of
development, or evolution in a broad sense, we don\'t only mean the
development of animal or plant life from a previous form, but we also
mean the great transformations within the universe, and we include the
origin of matter, the matter we can today perceive with our physical
senses.

We said last time that in the history of the evolution of our planet
there are seven consecutive stages, and I also briefly described these
to you. You must therefore think of how our earthly planet goes through
seven stages, which we call Rounds, in rhythmical sequence. Everything
that exists and lives on our Earth was also existent before our present
Earth come into being; it was existent in a kind of seed state, just as
a whole plant is present in a seed, sleeps in the seed, so to speak,
before it takes on form in the outer world. Such a slumber stage is
called a "Pralaya". On the other hand, the state in which everything
awakens, gradually emerges and progresses from a beginning to a high
point of perfection, we call "Manvantara". When the state of perfection
is reached, a Pralaya, a sleeping state, occurs once more, and this is
followed again by a state of waking and growth. Thus the planet goes
through this sequence seven times, reawakening seven times to a new
Round.

The time between one Manvantara and the next passes in a state in which
everything living on the earth sleeps, so to speak. But it isn\'t
comparable to normal human sleep. In normal sleep only the activities of
understanding and sense are interrupted, but you can see the physical
body. The sleeping state of the Earth must be thought of differently. No
earthly being is visible during this sleeping state. This state would be
perceptible only to the opened eye of the so-called *Dangma*, the
highest developed seer. This state is indescribable in words, for our
words are inadequate for this kind of existence. I find no words in any
language for this state. Therefore the developed seer says something
quite different in order to give an idea of this state. He says: imagine
a plant. You see this plant. Now imagine a kind of plaster impression of
the plant, but in such a way that the plant itself is empty space and a
Round is the plaster. Consider that the plaster is spiritual and only
perceptible for certain senses. Whoever can see the plant cannot see the
plaster impression at the same time, that is, the negative of the plant.
Something similar is what the developed seer would perceive of the Earth
during the Pralaya sleep. The Earth is not there. It is the hollow form,
swimming in a great, mighty sea of the highest spiritual beings that is
gradually disappearing and out of which the Being of the Earth itself
flows.

Then something begins to originate within this hollow space, something
not yet perceptible to the physical senses; it is only perceptible to
the highly developed seer who can consciously move in the spiritual
plane. At the beginning of the Earth\'s existence he would see a sphere
in space, a purely spiritual sphere in which only the spiritual is
present. Every time before a new Round begins, our Earth exists in such
a spiritual state. When it awakens from the Pralaya sleep, it does so as
such a sphere. The spiritual seer perceives it in a wonderful reddish
glimmer. But that Earth contains everything that later becomes Earth.
The densest bodies are also contained in this sphere.

How can we imagine this? It can be made clear by means of a simple
process. Imagine a glass full of water. The water is fluid. When you
cool the temperature sufficiently, the water becomes ice. You have the
same thing in front of you as previously --- ice is nothing other than
water, only in another form. Raise the temperature and the ice reverts
to water, with higher temperatures even to steam. By this example you
can imagine how all matter derives from the spirit through
densification. The spiritual sphere --- seen only by the seer\'s
developed eye --- densifies gradually after it passes through a small
Pralaya. It can then be seen by a less developed seer\'s eye. Then
follows a kind of short sleeping state, and now the sphere is visible to
the astral eye, that is, for whoever has developed this sense on the
astral plane. Again a Pralaya state follows, and the sphere appears
again as physical solid matter. Only now can physical eyes see it,
physical ears hear it, physical hands grasp it. That is the fourth
stage. Then a short Pralaya comes again. This stage disappears and again
an astral sphere presents itself, but with much more highly developed
beings. An analogous state appears in the sixth Round, also only visible
to the spiritual seer. Thereafter another Pralaya and then a state only
visible to the highest developed seer. Then follows what is invisible
even to the Dangma. A long Pralaya follows and then the whole process
begins again. This happens seven times. In this way the Earth is
transformed from the lowest to the highest level.

Let us now follow the first Round. We can study it best by observing
what exists on our Earth where it is most solid. In the first Round
there were no mineral forms yet, no physical nature energy and no
chemical energy. The Earth had carried out the previous evolution only
to create a foundation for physical existence; it created this
foundation in order to prepare a physical existence in the fourth Round.
Our Earth looked like a fiery mass, with such tremendous temperatures
that none of our present substances could have the form they now have.
All substances were jumbled up in that fiery primal porridge --- allow
me to use that trivial word --- in homogeneous, undifferentiated matter.
Theosophy says: the Earth was in the fiery stage. Common fire is not
meant, however, but fire of a higher, spiritual nature. There were no
chemical elements involved. But what was in the interior of this matter
was active. Two kinds of spiritual beings were active: those we call
"Dhyani Chohans", and those beings who had not yet descended to physical
materiality, who had a partially spiritual body, and who flowed through
the fiery matter with tremendous rapidity. We see here a continuous
emergence and disappearance of irregular forms, also of forms that
remind us of those that will exist on Earth at a much later time.

The emerging and disappearing seems to follow a pattern. Forms arise
which are reminiscent of later crystals and plants --- even something
that takes on human form, and then disperses. The humans who would later
incarnate lived in that fire, modeling and preparing their bodies. That
is how the Earth\'s first Round appears to us. Then followed the
transition from this fiery, flowing Earth to the sleep-state.

The second Round began in the same spiritual way. "Ether" is finer than
our present-day gas, but denser than the Earth was in the previous
stage. In this very fine matter what we call chemical elements formed.
You can find this second stage wonderfully described in religious books,
where it is written that the divine beings ordered everything according
to mass, number and weight. What had earlier been irregular was now
organized in chemical elements according to number. The chemist will
understand me, for he knows the regular periodic system of the elements.
The individual substances were not yet related to each other. Now,
however, as matter became differentiated, we see the most wonderful
forms coming into existence which remind us of later forms, only they
are not yet solid: star-like forms, angular forms, tetrahedrons,
polyhedrons, round forms and so on. The forms that will later constitute
nature are intimated. As in the first Round crystal forms were
prearranged, the plant forms were constituted in the second Round. Then
all flowed away; the astral and spiritual natures went through a Pralaya
stage again and re-appeared in the third Round.

When we consider the physical state of the third Round, we find matter
in a quite different state. It is not yet differentiated as air and
water, but forms a kind of mist, or steam. It is no longer an ether
form, but rather somewhat as cloud formations are today. And within
these mist formations, which we find described in old sagas --- the
sagas of Nebelheim (home of mist) and Niflheim describe this state ---
we see matter in another form, no longer organized according to number,
but equipped with energy. The esoteric researcher speaks here of the Law
of Selected Relationships. The chemical substances organize themselves
according to the Law of Selected Relationships. Now, however, in the
third Round, energy emerged, which allowed the small to become larger
and expand. The substances could organize themselves from within,
energize themselves. Not only the first plant forms, which we met in the
second Round, appeared, but growth was also possible. The first animal
forms appeared, which we would consider to be extremely grotesque today.
Gigantically large, colossal shapes formed themselves out of the mass of
mist. For the occultist there is something of truth when he looks at the
clouds and sees that one cloud looks like a camel, another like a horse.
In the third Round the beings were mist-like forms, which reproduced by
one transforming itself into the other, one deriving from the other,
like the lower cell organisms, which are reminiscent of this process.
These animal bodies, which formed out of the mist, could now provide the
basis for those individualities who came from previous worlds to find
bodies. The human being could now incarnate. He found a body which
allowed him to appear, at first in an imperfect, primitive, groping way.
Failed incarnations were also possible. We could say that during the
third Round beings existed on the Earth who were intermediate beings
between man and animal, in which the human being did not feel completely
right, but could nevertheless incarnate.

Then another Pralaya occurred, and then the fourth Round. That is the
Round to which we belong today. The Earth passed through the spiritual
state, went through the astral and etheric states and finally arrived at
the physical state which we have now reached. During the first Round the
foundation for the mineral kingdom was formed, during the second Round
the foundation for the vegetable kingdom was formed, during the third
Round the possibility for animal forms was established. And now, during
the fourth Round, the human being acquired the ability to take on the
form he has today.

Let us consider the state of our physical Earth somewhat more closely.
The state of the Earth in this fourth Round must be described as being
much denser than the states of the previous Rounds. First there was a
fiery state, then a misty one, then one between air and water. Still
during the beginning of the fourth Round we had a kind of gushing
matter, similar to protein. Gradually it all condensed, and what we have
today as matter is nothing other than the condensed, originally gushing
matter, exactly as ice is condensed water. At the beginning of the
fourth Round all beings were created so they could live in this gushing
matter. Man had a form similar to the one he has now, but his
consciousness was extremely dim, comparable to that of a dreaming
person. He dreamed his being in a kind of sleeping consciousness; the
spirit was still lacking. Let us consider this state more closely. The
human being was possible in that flowing, gushing state. We call these
people of the first race dream-men. It is difficult to describe them.
Another stage followed this one, in which matter became denser and
separated into a more spiritual and a more physical materiality,
comparable to the North and South Poles.

Now I ask you to consider the difference between the esoteric and the
usual understanding of Darwinism. We have the human being present in the
indicated stage of the earth, as well as the vegetable kingdom. The
animal kingdom was also present, but without sexual reproduction
capability, without warm blood and not yet capable of bringing forth
sounds. The human being was also mute. He could not yet think, not even
dim thoughts. The spirit had not yet entered the bodies. In the
following, second race, matter separated into two poles. The human
beings withdrew the matter that was useful to them and separated out the
less useful matter, from which a kind of lateral branch of the higher
animals formed. The lower animals were similar to today\'s mollusks,
even fish-like forms developed.

The human being developed further and at the third stage discarded the
matter that would not enable him to become the bearer of a higher
consciousness. He gave it up as material for the animals, which now
looked like amphibians with gigantic forms. They are described in fables
and myths as flying dragons and so on. Until then, no being possessed
sexual reproductive capacities. Not until the middle of the third race,
the Lemurian epoch, does this appear, albeit primitively. The scene of
this development, Lemuria, was in Asia in the Indian Ocean.

During the middle of the Lemurian age the great event occurred which
allowed man to become a human being. The human beings who came over from
previous planetary states were not all at the same level of development.
Those who had reached a normal evolution during the previous misty earth
cycle were able to incarnate during the third epoch. Among them,
however, there were some who had already reached a higher stage; they
could not incorporate during the third race at all. During every Round
there are humans who develop to a normal stage and others who are more
advanced. These are the masters. They are more highly developed
individuals. In Theosophy they are called solar pitris or sun pitris.
They had reached a higher spirituality, but could no more incarnate in
the bodies of the men of those times than a contemporary person could
incarnate in a plant. They waited for further evolution until the
appropriate time had come, during the fourth race, when their
incarnation could take place. Thus a spiritually highly developed
humanity arose. The sagas and myths relate how at that time
personalities existed who rose far above their fellow men. Individuals
such as Prometheus, the Indian Rishis, Fire-Rishis, who were the leaders
of humanity, including Manus, who gave laws to later humanity. Only
these solar Pitris could incarnate as adepts.

I already mentioned that at the start of the fourth Round sexuality did
not yet exist. The separation of the sexes occurred only during the
Lemurian time. Therewith the first incarnations were possible, the
taking over of a body which hadn\'t already existed. Previously one
being derived from another. With the separation of the sexes during the
middle of the Lemurian age, birth and death arose and therefore the
possibility of the effects of karma. The human being could burden
himself with guilt. Everything we know as "human" arose at that time.

The Lemurian continent was destroyed by a fire-like catastrophe, and the
Atlantean continent arose on the floor of what is now the Atlantic
Ocean. During the Atlantean time another important event occurred to
which I drew your attention when I spoke of the Whitsun holiday. I said
that, with the exception of the solar Pitris, all beings lived in a
lower spiritual condition. The solar Pitris could only take on selected
bodies. Other bodies would only have allowed them to live with a dim
consciousness. Dull-minded individuals would have resulted had they used
the existent bodies. The Pitris therefore waited until certain
animal-like forms evolved further. On the one hand they sank deeper into
instinctual desires, but on the other hand, by this means the
prerequisites for the later development of the brain were given. Matter
was differentiated into nervous matter and sexual matter. The Pitris who
had waited for that later time incarnated in this inferior matter.
Religion indicates this as the biblical fall from paradise: the
incarnation in worsened matter. If that hadn\'t happened, they would
have remained in a much less conscious state. They would not have
attained the clear thinking we now posses, but would have remained in a
much duller state. They paid for this by allowing their bodies to be
inferior, which however was compensated for by refined brain matter,
thereby allowing them to achieve a higher level of consciousness and
spirituality. A particular result of the evolution of the Atlantean race
was the development of a phenomenal memory.

After Atlantis was destroyed by water, continued evolution resulted in
our contemporary fifth race, during which deductive reasoning was a
special achievement. This enabled the human race to bring art and
science to a high level of development, which previously had not been
possible. During the fifth sub-race of the fourth Round humanity reached
a high-point: control by the spirit, which had incarnated in matter, so
that humanity could ascend to higher and higher stages of evolution.

We have seen how the cosmos evolved in rhythmic stages to the point
where we now stand. In previous Rounds the following developed:

 1. the mineral kingdom

2\. the vegetable kingdom

3\. the animal kingdom

and then ---

4\. the human being

 

Theosophical cosmology is a self-contained whole, derived from the
wisdom of the most developed seers. If I had a little more time I would
be able to indicate to you how certain natural scientific facts are
conducive to testifying to the accuracy of this image of the world. Look
at Haeckel\'s famous phylogenic trees, for example, in which evolution
is materialistically explained. If instead of matter you consider the
spiritual stages, as Theosophy describes them, then you can make the
phylogenic trees as Haeckel did --- only the explanation is different.

In order that you do not confuse what I have said with what is described
in many theosophical books as the various astral or physical states, I
would like to bring the following to your attention. Evolution is often
described as if they were concurrent stages. You find spheres placed
next to each other, so that it appears as though life went from one
sphere to another. In reality only one sphere exists, and only its
conditions change. It is always the same sphere which goes through the
various metamorphoses: spiritual, astral, physical, and so on.

We have seen that the introduction to these lectures, which we took from
Goethe\'s words, is completely justified --- that it is after all the
human being who is the goal, the task of the earthly planet. The
esotericist knows that every planet has its specific task. Nothing in
the cosmos is coincidental.

The task of physical evolution is that what is created for us humans
achieve its objective. You will not find a human being as he is today on
Earth on any other planet. Beings, yes --- but not human beings. The
Earth exists in order that "I"-conscious human beings could be created.
Through the first four Rounds the kingdoms of nature evolved in order
that in the fourth man could be made a self-conscious being, who could
reflect himself in his body. He will rise to higher levels of evolution,
something that few can understand correctly. In the next, the fifth
Round, the mineral kingdom will disappear. All mineral matter will be
transformed to vegetable matter. Then the vegetable kingdom will reach
its culmination and in the next Round the animal kingdom will form the
lowest kingdom. During the seventh Round the human being will achieve
his highest level of evolution. He will have become what planetary
evolution intends.

Whoever understands this can have a profounder insight into the
religious documents. There was a time when people believed like children
in the religious documents. Then the Enlightenment came, and nothing is
believed any more. But a time will come when people will learn to
understand the images preserved for us in religious documents, fairy
tales and fables. Thus we have the seven Rounds as the seven days of
creation in the Bible. The first three days of creation have gone by, we
are now in the fourth day of creation and the last three days of
creation are yet to come. The first three days of creation in Genesis
represent the past Rounds, and the last three indicate what is to come
in the future. Rightly understood, Moses wanted to say with the
description of the first three days, that we live in the fourth Round;
he describes the fourth day of creation in a quite special way. That is
why you find a double creation in Genesis. Those who judge the Bible
with their intellect only will never understand it. The human being of
the seventh day of creation has not been created. That man was made of
clay is a symbol of our fourth Round. The double creation tells us in
images of what has been created, the stage in which we now find
ourselves, and of the stage at the end of the seventh Round. When we see
the Bible\'s message in this way, a meaning of these documents suddenly
arises which we could not have previously understood. Humanity will
finally see that there is such a profound meaning there that one would
almost have to become a different person in order to understand it.

It is necessary that in our times the high, spiritual meaning of these
old documents be revealed, and that is the task of the theosophical
movement. It doesn\'t criticize the materialism of our times because it
considers it to be necessary. But it strives to enable people to again
recognize the spiritual meaning of these documents. We will work on this
during the coming winter. Today\'s lecture is the last of this cycle. We
will, however, still meet here every Monday at eight o\'clock.

