# Last Supper for the West

![](putin-supper.jpg){class="alarge"}

### China Will Decide the Outcome of Russia v. the West\
###Is Putin the Face of the Future or the Final Gasp of the Past?

## By [John Feffer](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/johnfeffer/)

In its attempt to swallow Ukraine whole, Russia has so far managed to
bite off only the eastern Donbas region and a portion of its southern
coast. The rest of the country remains independent, with its capital
Kyiv intact.

No one knows how this meal will end. Ukraine is eager to force Russia to
disgorge what it's already devoured, while the still-peckish invader
clearly has [no
interest](https://fpif.org/a-just-ceasefire-or-just-a-ceasefire/) in
leaving the table.

[]{#anchor}This might seem like an ordinary territorial dispute between
predator and prey. Ukraine's central location between east and west,
however, turns it into a potentially world-historical conflict like the
Battle of Tours when the Christian Franks turned back the surging
Ummayad army of Muslims in 732 AD or the withdrawal of U.S. forces from
Vietnam in 1975.

The pivotal nature of the current war seems obvious. Ukraine has for
some time wanted to join western institutions like the European Union.
Russia [prefers to
absorb](http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/66181) Ukraine into
its *russkiy mir* (Russian world). However, this tug of war over the
dividing line between East and West isn't a simple recapitulation of the
Cold War. Russian President Vladimir Putin clearly has no interest in
reconstituting the Soviet Union, much less in sending his troops
westward into Poland or Germany, while the United States isn't wielding
Ukraine as a proxy to fight the Kremlin. Both superpowers have far more
circumscribed aims.

Nonetheless, the war has oversized implications. What at first glance
seems like a spatial conflict is also a temporal one. Ukraine has the
great misfortune to straddle the fault line between a twentieth century
of failed industrial strategies and a possible twenty-first century
reorganization of society along clean-energy lines.

In the worst-case scenario, Ukraine could simply be absorbed into the
world's largest petro-state. Or the two sides could find themselves in a
punishing stalemate that [cuts off the world's
hungriest](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/06/15/ukraine-war-russia-grain-food-crisis-world-hunger/)
from vast stores of grain and continues to distract the international
community from pushing forward with an urgently needed reduction of
carbon emissions. Only a decisive defeat of
[Putinism](https://fpif.org/no-pasaran-ukraine-2022/) --- with its toxic
mix of despotism, corruption, right-wing nationalism, and devil-may-care
extractivism --- would offer the world some sliver of hope when it comes
to restoring some measure of planetary balance.

Ukraine is fighting for its territory and, ultimately, its survival. The
West has come to its aid in defense of international law. But the stakes
in this conflict are far more consequential than that.

**What Putin Wants**

Once upon a time, Vladimir Putin was a conventional Russian politician.
Like many of his predecessors, he enjoyed a complicated *ménage à trois
*with democracy (the boring spouse) and despotism (his true love). He
toggled between confrontation and cooperation with the West. Not a
nationalist, he presided over a multiethnic federation; not a populist,
he didn't care much about playing to the masses; not an imperialist, he
deployed brutal but limited force to keep Russia from spinning apart.

He also understood the limits of Russian power. In the 1990s, his
country had suffered a precipitous decline in its economic fortune, so
he worked hard to rebuild state power on what lay beneath his feet.
Russia, after all, is the world's [largest
exporter](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/3/17/infographic-how-much-of-your-countrys-gas-comes-from-russia-interactive)
of natural gas, its second-largest [oil
producer](https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/oil-producing-countries),
and its third-[largest coal
exporter](https://www.statista.com/chart/20587/biggest-coal-exporters/).
Even his efforts to prevent regions from slipping away from the Russian
sphere of influence were initially constrained. In 2008, for instance,
he [didn't
try](https://www.cnn.com/2022/05/16/opinions/putin-georgia-ukraine-war-mitchell/index.html)
to take over neighboring Georgia, just force a stalemate that brought
two breakaway regions into the Russian sphere of influence.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Meanwhile, Putin pursued strategies aimed at weakening his perceived
adversaries. He ratcheted up cyberattacks [in the
Baltics](https://warsawinstitute.org/baltic-states-versus-russian-hybrid-threats/),
expanded maritime provocations [in the Black
Sea](https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/05/20/what-is-russia-doing-in-black-sea-pub-84549),
advanced [aggressive territorial
claims](https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/03/29/russia-in-arctic-critical-examination-pub-84181)
in the Arctic, and supported right-wing nationalists like France's
Marine Le Pen and Italy's Matteo Salvini to undermine the unity of the
European Union. In 2016, he even attempted to further polarize American
politics via [dirty
tricks](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/10/01/how-russia-helped-to-swing-the-election-for-trump)
in support of Donald Trump.

Always sensitive to challenges to his own power, Putin watched with
increasing concern as "color revolutions" spread through parts of the
former Soviet Union --- from Georgia (2003) and Ukraine (2005) to
Belarus (2006) and Moldova (2009). Around the time of the 2013-2014
Euromaidan protests in Ukraine, he [began
shifting](https://ips-dc.org/report-battle-for-another-world-progressive-response-to-new-right/)
domestically to a nationalism that prioritized the interests of ethnic
Russians, while cracking down
[ferociously](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-60878663) on dissent
and [ramping
up](https://www.businessinsider.com/russia-assassination-abroad-2017-6)
attacks on critics abroad. An intensifying sense of paranoia led him to
[rely
on](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/03/31/russias-putin-is-so-powerful-everyone-is-scared-to-tell-him-the-truth.html)
an ever-smaller circle of advisors, ever less likely to contradict him
or offer him bad news.

In the early 2020s, facing disappointment abroad, Putin effectively gave
up on preserving even a semblance of good relations with the United
States or the European Union. Except for Viktor Orbán in Hungary, the
European far right had proven a complete disappointment, while his
fair-weather friend Donald Trump had lost the 2020 presidential
election. Worse yet, European countries seemed determined to meet their
Paris climate accord commitments, which sooner or later would mean
radically reducing their dependence on Russian fossil fuels.

In contrast to China's eagerness to stay on good terms with the United
States and Europe, Putin's Russia began turning its back on centuries of
"westernizing" impulses to embrace its Slavic history and traditions.
Like North Korea's Kim Jong-un and India's Narendra Modi, Putin decided
that the only ideology that ultimately mattered was nationalism, in his
case a particularly virulent, anti-liberal form of it.

All of this means that Putin will pursue his aims in Ukraine regardless
of the long-term impact on relations with the West. He's clearly
[convinced](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/06/03/russia-putin-economy-attrition-war/)
that political polarization, economic sclerosis, and a wavering security
commitment to that embattled country will eventually force Western
powers to accommodate a more assertive Russia.

He might not be wrong.

**Whither the West?**

Since the invasion of Ukraine, the West has never seemed more unified.
Even previously neutral Finland and Sweden [have lined
up](https://fpif.org/russia-nato-and-the-future-of-neutrality/) to join
NATO, while the United States and much of Europe have largely agreed
when it comes to sanctions against Russia.

Still, all is not well in the West. In the United States, where Trumpism
continues to metastasize within the Republican Party, 64% of Americans
are convinced that democracy is "in crisis and at risk of failing,"
according to a [January NPR/Ipsos
poll](https://www.npr.org/2022/01/03/1069764164/american-democracy-poll-jan-6).
Meanwhile, in a surprising [Alliance of Democracies Foundation
poll](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/may/05/us-threat-democracy-russia-china-global-poll)
last year, 44% of respondents in 53 countries rated the United States, a
self-proclaimed beacon of liberty, as a greater threat to democracy than
either China (38%) or Russia (28%).

In Europe, the far right continues to challenge the democratic
foundations of the continent. Uber-Christian Viktor Orbán recently won
his fourth term as Hungary's prime minister; the super-conservative Law
and Justice Party is firmly at the helm in Poland; the anti-immigrant,
Euroskeptical Swiss People's Party remains the most significant force in
that country's parliament; and the top three far-right political parties
in Italy together attract [nearly
50%](https://www.politico.eu/europe-poll-of-polls/italy/) in public
opinion polls.

Meanwhile, the global economy, still on neo-liberal autopilot, has
jumped out of the pandemic frying pan into the fires of stagflation.
With stock markets heading into bear territory and a global recession
looming, the World Bank [recently
cut](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/06/07/world-bank-global-growth-forecast-stagflation/)
its 4.1% growth forecast for 2022 to 2.9%. The Biden administration's
perceived failure to address inflation may deliver Congress to
Republican extremists this November and social democratic leaders
throughout Europe may pay a similar political price for [record-high
Eurozone
inflation](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/31/euro-zone-inflation-hits-yet-another-record-high-as-food-and-energy-prices-soar.html). 

Admittedly, the continued military dominance of the United States and
its NATO allies would seem to refute all rumors of the decline of the
West. In reality, though, the West's military record hasn't been [much
better](https://warontherocks.com/2019/08/the-myth-of-american-military-dominance/)
than Russia's performance in Ukraine. In August 2021, the United States
ignominiously withdrew its forces from its 20-year war in Afghanistan as
the Taliban surged back to power. This year, France [pulled its
troops](https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/sahel/mali/frances-troop-withdrawal-mali)
from Mali after a decade-long failure to defeat al-Qaeda and Islamic
State militants. Western-backed forces failed to dislodge Bashar
al-Assad in Syria or prevent a horrific civil war from enveloping Libya.
All the trillions of dollars devoted to achieving "full-spectrum
dominance" couldn't produce enduring success in Iraq or Somalia, [wipe
out terrorist
factions](https://fpif.org/u-s-counterterrorism-in-africa-has-failed-whats-the-alternative/)
throughout Africa, or effect regime change in North Korea or Cuba.

Despite its overwhelming military and economic power, the West no longer
seems to be on the same upward trajectory as after the collapse of the
Soviet Union. Back in the 1990s, Eastern Europe and even parts of the
former Soviet Union signed up to join NATO and the European Union.
Russia under Boris Yeltsin inked a partnership agreement with NATO,
while both
[Japan](https://www.rips.or.jp/en/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/RIPS_Policy_Perspectives_No.2.pdf)
and South Korea were interested in pursuing a proposed global version of
that security alliance.

Today, however, the West seems increasingly irrelevant outside its own
borders. China, love it or hate it, has rebuilt its Sinocentric sphere
in Asia, while becoming the most important economic player in the Global
South. It's even established alternative global financial institutions
that, one day, might replace the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
World Bank. Turkey has turned its back on the European Union (and vice
versa) and Latin America is heading in a more independent
[direction](https://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/en/work-document/is-latin-america-part-of-the-west/).
Consider it a sign of the times that, when the call went out to sanction
Russia, most of the non-Western world [ignored
it](https://fpif.org/the-universality-of-ukraine/).

The foundations of the West are indeed increasingly unstable. Democracy
is no longer, as scholar Francis Fukuyama
[imagined](https://www.jstor.org/stable/24027184) it in the late 1980s,
the inevitable trajectory of world history. The global economy, while
spawning inexcusable inequality and being upended by the recent
pandemic, is exhausting the resource base of the planet. Both right-wing
extremism and garden-variety nationalism are eroding the freedoms that
safeguard liberal society. It's no surprise, then, that Putin believes a
divided West will ultimately accede to his aggression.

**The Ukraine Pivot**

There's never a good time for war.

But hostilities have flared in Ukraine just as the world was supposed to
be accelerating its transition to a clean-energy future. In another
three years, carbon emissions [must hit their
peak](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/04/ipcc-report-mitigation-climate-change/)
and, in the next eight years, countries must cut their carbon emissions
[by
half](https://unric.org/en/new-ipcc-report-emissions-can-be-halved-by-2030/)
if there's any hope of meeting the goals of the Paris climate accord by
2050. Even before the current war, the [most comprehensive
estimate](https://www.unep.org/resources/emissions-gap-report-2021) put
the rise in global temperature at a potentially disastrous 2.7 degrees
Celsius by the end of the century (nearly twice the 1.5 degree goal of
that agreement).

The war in Ukraine is propelling the world full tilt in the opposite
direction. China and India are, in fact,
[increasing](https://www.sustainable-carbon.org/the-war-in-ukraine-has-stalled-global-efforts-to-cut-emissions/)
their use of coal, the worst possible fossil fuel in terms of carbon
emissions. Europe is desperate to replace Russian oil and natural gas
and countries like Greece are now considering increasing their own
production of dirty energy. In a similar fashion, the United States is
once again
[boosting](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/03/31/fact-sheet-president-bidens-plan-to-respond-to-putins-price-hike-at-the-pump/)
oil and gas production, [releasing
supplies](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/03/31/us-to-release-1-million-barrels-of-oil-per-day-from-reserves-to-help-cut-gas-prices.html)
from its Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and hoping to persuade
oil-producing nations to pump yet more of their product into global
markets.

With its invasion, in other words, Russia has helped to derail the
world's already faltering effort at decarbonization. Although last fall
Putin
[committed](https://fpif.org/russian-green-deal-light-at-the-end-of-the-tunnel/)
his country to a net-zero carbon policy by 2060, phasing out fossil
fuels now would be economic suicide given that he's done so little to
diversify the economy. And despite international sanctions, Russia has
been making a killing with fossil-fuel sales, [raking in a record \$97
billion](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/13/climate/russia-oil-gas-record-revenue.html)
in the first 100 days of battle.

All of this could suggest, of course, that Vladimir Putin represents the
last gasp of the failed petropolitics of the twentieth century. But
don't count him out yet. He might also be the harbinger of a future in
which technologically sophisticated politicians continue to pursue their
narrow political and regional aims, making it ever less possible for the
world to survive climate change.

Ukraine is where Putin is making his stand. As for Putinism itself ---
how long it lasts, how persuasive it proves to be for other countries
--- much depends on China.

After Putin's invasion, Beijing could have given full-throated support
to its ally, promised to buy all the fossil fuels Western sanctions left
stranded, provided military equipment to buoy the faltering Russian
offensive, and severed its own ties with Europe and the United States.
Beijing could have broken with international financial institutions like
the World Bank and the IMF in favor of the New Development Bank and the
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, its own multinational
organizations. In this way, Ukraine could have turned into a genuine
proxy war between East and West.

Instead, China has been [playing both
sides](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/06/02/china-support-russia-ukraine/).
Unhappy with Putin's unpredictable moves, including the invasion, which
have disrupted China's economic expansion, it's also been disturbed by
the sanctions against Russia that similarly cramp its style. Beijing
isn't yet strong enough to challenge the hegemony of the dollar and it
also remains dependent on Russian fossil fuels. Now the planet's
[greatest emitter](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-57018837) of
greenhouse gases, China has been building a tremendous amount of
renewable energy infrastructure. Its wind sector [generated nearly
30%](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-19/two-charts-that-show-china-is-as-reliant-as-ever-on-fossil-fuels#:~:text=China%20remains%20as%20tied%20as,hit%20net%2Dzero%20by%202060.)
more power in 2021 than the year before and its solar sector increased
by nearly 15%. Still, because of a growing appetite for energy, its
overall dependence on coal and natural gas has hardly been reduced. 

Reliant as it is on Russian energy imports, China won't yet pull the
plug on Putinism, but Washington could help push Beijing in that
direction. It was once a dream of the Obama administration to partner
with the world's second-largest economy [on clean energy
projects](https://www.energy.gov/ia/initiatives/us-china-clean-energy-research-center-cerc).
Instead of focusing as it has on myriad ways to contain China, the Biden
administration could offer it a green version of an older
[proposal](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-united-states-and-china-a-g-2-in-the-making/)
to create a Sino-American economic duopoly, this time focused on making
the global economy sustainable in the process. The two countries could
[join
Europe](https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en)
in advancing a Global Green Deal.

In recent months, President Biden has been willing to entertain the
previously unthinkable by mending fences [with
Venezuela](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/05/17/venezuela-oil-sanctions-chevron/)
and [Saudi
Arabia](https://www.politico.com/news/2022/06/15/joe-biden-saudi-arabia-trip-bin-salman-00039679)
in order to flood global markets with yet more oil and so reduce soaring
prices at the pump. Talk about twentieth-century mindsets. Instead, it's
time for Washington to consider an eco-détente with Beijing that would,
among other things, drive a stake through the heart of Putinism,
safeguard Ukraine's sovereignty, and stop the planet from burning to a
crisp.

Otherwise, we know how this unhappy meal will end --- as a Last Supper
for humanity.

Copyright 2022 John Feffer

Featured image: [Forest
wildfire](https://flickr.com/photos/projectlm/22412407671/in/photolist-A9vrXV-2jH1hjB-YAS95D-e6Kp8z-8szjCW-8swiD2-e6R41U-2hwu25p-2jCeusi-WXCYzQ-8jHwJN-8jHHjC-8jEncB-8jDVCz-8jHDCq-8jEtL2-8jHvdC-7SJdP-8jE5bD-8jEeqH-8jHheE-8jHcUh-8jEfRg-8jHjT1-8jHaos-8jDUgr-N6J9J9-cHg9BL-6MiG5N-8jHtku-8jEd3R-4tQYa8-8jErh6-8jEoHM-8jE3Mi-8jHbFL-8jH93q-8jHivW-8jEuYa-8jExCr-8jHB2W-8jEai2-2mdCjVw-2jZbfJT-2mbpTij-8jEbzz-4grW8e-2jGVV87-2jGVVbo-2jH1hu6)
by [Project LM](https://flickr.com/photos/projectlm/) is licensed under
[CC BY-NC-ND 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/) /
Flickr

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [John Feffer](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/johnfeffer/)

**John Feffer**,
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/the-five-plagues-testing-humanity/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/the-five-plagues-testing-humanity/),
is the author of the dystopian novel
[*Splinterlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467244/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and* *the
director of Foreign Policy In Focus at the Institute for Policy
Studies.* [*Frostlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
a Dispatch Books original, is volume two of his *Splinterlands* series,
and the final novel in the trilogy,
[*Songlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
has only recently been published. He has also written [*Right Across the
World: The Global Networking of the Far-Right and the Left
Response*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0745341896/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

Thanks to 
[TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com)
where this article originally appeared -- without
to title image.

