# A Trail of Tears

![](wounded-soldiers.png){class="a"}

### How Veterans Return From America's Wars

## By [Ann Jones](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/annjones/)

\[*The text of this piece is an excerpt, slightly adapted, from Ann
Jones's book *[They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from America's
Wars --- The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
published by Dispatch Books/Haymarket Books*\]

[In 2010, I began to follow U.S. soldiers down a long trail of waste and
sorrow that led from the battle spaces of Afghanistan to the emergency
room of the trauma hospital at Bagram Air Base, where their catastrophic
wounds were surgically treated and their condition stabilized.  Then I
accompanied some of them by cargo plane to Ramstein Air Base in Germany
for more surgeries at Landstuhl Regional Medical Center, or LRMC
(pronounced Larm-See), the largest American hospital outside the United
States.]{class="intro"}

Once stabilized again, those critical patients who survived
would be taken by ambulance a short distance back to Ramstein, where a
C-17 waited to fly them across the Atlantic to Dover Air Base in
Delaware. There, tall, multilayered ambulances awaited the wounded for
the last leg of their many-thousand-mile journey to Walter Reed Army
Medical Center in Washington D.C. or the Naval Hospital at Bethesda,
Maryland, where, depending upon their injuries, they might remain for a
year or two, or more.

Now, we are in Germany, halfway home.  This evening, the ambulance from
LRMC heading for the flight line at Ramstein will be full of
critical-care patients, so I leave the hospital early and board the
plane to watch the medical teams bring them aboard.  They've done this
drill many times a week since the start of the Afghan War.  They are
practiced, efficient, and fast, and so we are soon in the air again.
This time, with a full load.

Two rows of double bunks flank an aisle down the center of the C-17, all
occupied by men tucked under homemade patchwork quilts emblazoned with
flags and eagles, the handiwork of patriotic American women. Along the
walls of the fuselage, on straight-backed seats of nylon mesh, sit the
ambulatory casualities from the Contingency Aeromedical Staging Facility
(CASF), the holding ward for noncritical patients just off the flight
line at Ramstein.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

At the back of the plane, slung between stanchions, are four litters
with critical care patients, and there among them is the same three-man
CCAT (Critical Care Air Transport) team I accompanied on the flight from
Afghanistan. They've been back and forth to Bagram again since then, but
here they are in fresh brown insulated coveralls, clean shaven, calm,
cordial, the doctor busy making notes on a clipboard, the nurse and the
respiratory therapist checking the monitors and machines on the SMEEDs.
(A SMEED, or Special Medical Emergency Evacuation Device, is a raised
aluminum table affixed to a patient's gurney.) Designed to bridge the
patient's lower legs, a SMEED is now often used in the evacuation of
soldiers who don't have any.

Here again is Marine Sergeant Wilkins, just as he was on the flight from
Afghanistan: unconscious, sedated, intubated, and encased in a vacuum
spine board. The doctor tells me that the staff at LRMC removed
Wilkins's breathing tube, but they had to put it back. He remains in
cold storage, like some pod-person in a sci-fi film. You can hardly see
him in there, inside the black plastic pod. You can't determine if he is
alive or dead without looking at the little needles on the dials of the
machines on the SMEED. Are they wavering? Hard to tell.

**Flight Risk**

The CCAT team has three other critical patients to think about. They are
covered with white sheets and blankets, but it's easy to see that the
second patient is missing both legs. His right hand is swathed in thick
bandages, almost as fat as a football. His face is ripped and torn so
that his features appear to be not quite where they belong, but pushed
up and to one side --- his nose split and turned askew. He's sedated and
on a ventilator meant to assist his breathing, but his chest convulses
as he struggles with the job.

The respiratory therapist hovers, checking monitors, adjusting a
breathing tube, and the man quiets. But not for long. The IED blast that
took off both his legs above the knee bypassed his pelvis to slam into
his chest. He must have been doubled over, crouching, when he walked
onto the bomb. The impact damaged his lungs in ways not yet fully
understood, so that now when he breathes on his own, every breath costs
him more than he has to give.

The CCAT team confers. To stop the convulsive effort to breathe, the
doctor can paralyze him and let the ventilator do the work of
respiration, but that means removing from his intestine the feeding tube
pumping in the calories he needs to heal these catastrophic wounds. It's
a fine line, and the team walks it for the next hour until it's clear
the man needs rest more than nourishment. Then the doctor administers a
drug, the body grows still as stone, and the soldier inside sleeps
softly while the ventilator steadily breathes in and breathes out.

Patient number three is breathing on his own and fast asleep, a saline
drip feeding into his arm. He looks okay, but for the flattening of the
blanket under the SMEED. He's lost both legs, but both below the knee.
He has his hands. He has his junk. Of these four patients, he's the one
the military and the media will call "lucky." But the doctor doesn't
call him that. He says, "You can't assess his injuries in comparison to
those of other soldiers who happen to be on the same plane. You have to
assess them in comparison to who he was before." He is a boy who used to
have legs and now he doesn't.

The fourth CCAT patient is a darkly handsome kid who lost both legs to
an IED. His right arm ends in a bulbous bandage, but something about its
shape suggests the hand might still be all there. He's conscious and
breathing on his own, vaguely gazing at a thin woman in blond boots and
a light jacket who stands next to his litter and clutches at the rail as
if to hold herself upright.

She was called to LRMC because her son was close to death, but she is
now taking him home, what's left of him, alive. In the dim light, she
looks dazed, but she leans over him and speaks into his ear and soon he
sleeps. The doctor tells me that the boy, a Marine, lost one leg below
the knee, and the other very high up --- too high for him to wear a
prosthetic leg.

"He'll be in a wheel chair," the doctor says. "It's doubtful he'll ever
walk. His right arm is all there, but the hand is blasted. He'll
probably lose his fingers at least, but he may have enough of a hand
left to power a wheel chair on his own. It's hard to say. He lost one
testicle, too, and part of the penis and urethra. But he could still be
fertile. There's a chance."

The cavernous plane is very cold. There's a blanket on each of the seats
along the wall. I wrap myself up and sit down next to my military minder
Sergeant Julian, mainly to stay out of the way of the CASF nurses who
are busy checking on their patients, getting those on the bunks well
settled for the long flight. The mother of the handsome kid has also
sunk into a seat next to her son's litter, but she leans forward, still
clutching the bedrail as if to hang on to her boy. She has thrown a
blanket around her like a cape, but even at a distance I can see that
she's cold. I pick up a spare blanket and take it to her. She looks up
as I hold it out to her wordlessly in the deafening plane. "I'm fine,"
she says, loudly enough for me to hear.

"Your son?"

"He's fine." She looks at him and changes tense. "He's going to be
fine."

"That's good," I say.

"He's alive. He almost wasn't, but he's alive. He's fine."

I offer the blanket again. "Take it. Keep warm."

Later I notice that she has made a cocoon of the blankets and slumped
over the adjacent seat to sleep. Only toward the end of the flight, when
she must be feeling some relief that her son is going to survive it,
does she begin to tell me about him. She got word of his injury when he
was still in the field hospital in Helmand Province, and she arrived at
LRMC from southern California the same day he was brought in from
Bagram. Three days later, miraculously, she is bringing him home. Well,
not home really, but to the States anyway, to the Naval hospital at
Bethesda, Maryland.

Her son has an older brother who deployed once to Iraq and once to
Afghanistan and now is safe at home in California. But this boy, a
Marine, had a training accident that left him with a head injury
requiring brain surgery. He was medically discharged, but reenlisted and
was deployed to Afghanistan. He had been there two months when his unit
was assigned to clean up an area another unit had officially cleared of
Taliban. You remember the policy: clear, hold, and build. They were
doing the hold part when he stepped on the IED. The other Marine, the
one who can't breathe, was hit by the same blast, or maybe another one
at the same time. "They told me how it happened," she says, "but I don't
think I heard."

Months later, I will call her in California to see how her son is
getting along. He's still in the hospital. They're still working on his
wounds. He's not doing any rehab yet. But the military moved him to San
Diego so she and her husband can visit him often. She says he's doing
"fine," though it will still be many months before he can come home.

In the meantime, her contractor husband has enlisted his friends to help
widen doorways, lower light switches, build ramps, and reconstruct a
bathroom on the ground floor for a boy in a wheelchair. It's a weekend
and I can hear them hammering as we talk on the phone. "They say he'll
always be in a wheelchair," she says, her voice shaking. "I was in our
pool this morning, and I realized that he'll never be able to get into
it by himself. He loves the pool." I stay on the line, listening to her
cry. She says, "He's a beautiful swimmer."

**"Everything Still Hurts..."**

On the plane I talk to some of the ambulatory patients sitting along the
walls, wrapped in blankets like so many Pashtuns. Most are hurt just
enough to have to be out of action for a while. One boy got a boot
caught in the door of an armored vehicle, an MRAP, that wasn't moving at
the time. It's a long way down from the passenger seat. He broke his
arm. He blurts this out, then tells me he worries about what he's going
to say back at his home base. "I can't tell them I just fell out."

Another kid dropped a barbell in the gym and broke some bones in his
foot. Two others hadn't recovered from chronic back pain and muscle
spasms induced by carrying too much weight. Doctors sent them back
downrange to their units two or three times and each time they broke
down again. The painkillers had only left them dazed. One says,
"Everything still hurts, and you can't remember what you're doing, so it
makes you nervous. So now they're sending me home because I guess maybe
the pain doesn't make you so nervous in the U.S. of A."

One young man collapsed while jogging at a base in the Persian Gulf. "I
need a new valve in my heart," he says, "so they're sending me home to
get it done there. I'm really lucky they found it. The Army saved my
life." His wife sits beside him, wearing a brand new Frankfurt
sweatshirt and a bracelet dripping with gnomes. While the doctors at
LRMC assessed her husband's cardiac function, she went shopping. She
tells me confidentially, "I for sure didn't want to sit around any old
hospital."

An older Army officer calls me over and gestures toward the empty seat
by his side. He sits ramrod straight, wrapped in his blanket, and speaks
through tight lips as if he fears what might come out of his mouth.
"I've been in the Army twenty-six years," he says, "and I can tell you
it's a con."

He has been an adviser to the chief counter terrorism officer in Iraq.
It's hard even to imagine what's involved in work like that, but his
version of his job description evidently failed to match the official
checklist of his boss. He doesn't think much of military bosses or
politicians or Americans in general who send the lowliest 1% to fight
wars that make the other 1%, on the high end, "monu-fuckin'-mentally
rich."

He says he's going home for "psych reasons" caused by "life," and he is
never going to deploy again. He has two sons, 21 and 23, in college,
"They won't have to serve," he says. "Before that happens, I'll shoot
them myself."

I ask if he has any particular reason to dislike the military so
intensely. "War is absurd," he says. "Boys don't know any better. But
for a grown man to be trapped in stupid wars --- it's embarrassing, it's
humiliating, it's absurd."

Copyright 2022 Ann Jones

Featured image:
[veteran](https://flickr.com/photos/29233640@N07/4051495505/in/photolist-7b1YsM-dwLsJS-5BfQv2-2m3Ry7D-A5j7MQ-7f6MZ4-DTrD77-ERakm4-wqPEoD-2npLyv8-2kxaBe5-bjHNje-a9Heri-pK8Wca-bv55KH-dn2L9B-8m1orp-2gjvkSH-2gkgswM-ps333j-2hqrqUv-p9X7sY-WbZo4L-7THExG-pczXDM-8m4zWf-2g3hTVi-8m1qez-8m1oX4-yCPEee-Fq4aj-8m4zY1-8m4x4u-2fqC2-e8Bfri-2iTSTGH-7eKXWM-Ru4ocr-paLxi3-Kc5h3e-a9Hepr-7tmjUr-WpVUHS-bvRqG7-aHaGXT-mEWpkB-d7cc6-p9XnST-ejEgfT-fho5X)
by [Robert Couse-Baker](https://flickr.com/photos/29233640@N07/) is
licensed under [CC BY 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)
/ Flickr

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [Ann Jones](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/annjones/)

**Ann Jones**,
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/americas-child-soldiers/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/americas-child-soldiers/),
is a non-resident fellow of the [Quincy Institute for Responsible
Statecraft](https://quincyinst.org/). She is at work on a book about
social democracy in Norway (and its absence in the United States). She
is the author of several books, including *Kabul in Winter: Life Without
Peace in Afghanistan* and most recently [*They Were Soldiers: How the
Wounded Return from America's Wars \-- the Untold
Stor*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[*y*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
a Dispatch Books original.

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](tomdispatch.com)
