RE: Memoir

Dear Cousin,

Congratulations on an impressive effort! Letting the world know who you
are, wanting to be sure you're not forgotten too quickly is a good
endeavor, I think. I address those issuesI with my paintings and
drawings. And some writing. To gather files, photographs and memories,
to consider what should be included and what should not be included,
what should be emphasized, what to include and what to leave out or
expunge, how you want to organize all that, what you want people to know
or think about you is overwhelming. I don't think I want to do that.
After I\'m gone the people who matter to me will think about me for an
awhile, I guess, perhaps through the three generations that already
exist and that will be the end of me.

Your memoir brought me face to face with all the thoughts about such
things; work you did to install Steiner's philosophy and world view into
being. All the people you met with, argued with, convinced to agree with
you and old Mr.S. All the children who were introduced to learning,
thinking, dance and art his way. Very admirable. Very time consuming,
very mind consuming. I hope you are pleased with result of all that
effort. I am very impressed! I hope you are pleased with your effort!
Are you?

Just a couple of things surprised me; So little reference to family and
children. Virtually no reference to Renate, or your other children. Were
they surprised about that? That absence disturbed me. I am glad you
wrote warmly about Maria Teresa. You attended lots of meetings, but you
had time to create a family along the way. It just indicates a lack of
connection and even respect. Or perhaps the memoir wasn't meant to be a
personal story, rather a story of your struggles and challenges in the
world of Anthroposophy. I have not meant to criticize, but I am a little
bewildered by parts of your book.

Much love,

Barbara Fox
