# Exile\'s End

![](exiles-end-cvr-sm.jpg){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith



*My faraway home is a land of lovers.\
A greeting there is no touch of the hand,\
No nod of the head, no *Guten Tag, Herr* \...\
In that distant land my friends all embrace me\
And kiss me and tell me: *Est√°s en tu casa*.\
A cleansing wind blows in from the Pampas,\
It swirls even now in the streets of my mind* \...\
... to be continued.

#### Act 1

In order to make an intelligent choice, or even a stupid one, you have
to have reached a certain age, not necessarily a legal age, but at least
one which allows thinking to function. On the other hand, according to
some, including myself, your spirit exists both before birth and after
death. And during the time between death and the future birth you train
for the big moment, which includes choosing your future parents. If your
future parents live in Brooklyn, NY as mine did, you will necessarily be
born there --- as I was. This implies that I made my first choice
(possibly influenced by previous events and choices, intelligent or
stupid) before I was even born. The way things turned out it was a very
good choice. My parents were neither rich nor poor, originally working
class, but after my father somehow became the U.S. sales representative
for a Cuban tobacco company (before Castro), we at least approached
middle class. When Castro took over Cuba the company lost its tobacco
source, but the owners had moved their money and themselves to Florida.
We stayed in Brooklyn and my father traveled a lot seeking tobacco in
Mexico, and South and Central America. I had no sisters or brothers,
don\'t know why. Neither my parents nor other relatives of that
generation were intellectuals, nor did they have much faith in
education, which they had lacked, having gone to work before finishing
high school. So, they left me on my own in that respect.

What follows is a description of choices I have made during my life on
earth. I have sometimes wondered to what extent they are strictly
true. You may see what I mean by that from what follows. The
descriptions are not necessarily or completely true, for memory is
never exact and egotism tends to bend events to favor oneself.

I was born on October 23, 1932, in Brooklyn, New York, to Mabel
Johnson and Alfred Smith. Mabel was born in New York City to Mabel
McGlynn, of Irish extraction, and Harry Johnson, born in Norway with a
Norwegian name later anglicized as Harry Johnson --- known in the
Lower East Side of Manhattan as "Dutch Harry." There is some doubt
concerning my father\'s place of birth. I, and everyone else, assumed
it was in the United States, but when my cousin Barbara investigated
the family tree, she concluded that he had been born in England and
arrived in the U.S. as a two-year-old infant. Both his parents ---
Gertrude Wellman and Francis Smith --- were English immigrants. My
grandfather became a captain in the New York national guard during the
Second World War, something a working-class Brit like him could never
have dreamed of becoming back on the old sod. I can still see the
large photo of him in his captain\'s uniform on their living room
wall.

My name at birth was Francis Smith. (I have a baptismal certificate to
prove it.) When an adult and for a while a student of astrology, I
worried if I was really a Scorpio, October 23^rd^ being on the cusp of
Libra. I asked my mother exactly when I was born, and she told me
nine-thirty P.M. in Greenpoint Hospital. That made me definitely a
Scorpio because 9:30 P.M. Brooklyn time was already 0:30 A.M October
24 Greenwich Mean Time. What a relief! I mean who wants to be a Libra
who can\'t make up his mind about anything, especially choices.

You may have noticed that Francis Smith is not the name I use as the
author of this memoir. I owe you an explanation if you\'ve gotten this
far. When I was about fourteen years old, my father took me on a
business trip to Havana, Cuba, for which I needed a passport, for
which I needed a birth certificate. I went to the Board of Health,
where they keep such documents. I told the lady who attended to me
that I was born on October 23, 1932, in Greenpoint Hospital, Brooklyn
and I wanted a copy of my birth certificate. After having retreated to
the inner sanctum of files, she came back to me and said that on that
date only a "baby boy Smith" was born. I guess they forgot to register
my name, it happens sometimes. "What did you say your name is?\"

I saw an opportunity. I never liked having Francis for a name, for it
sounded exactly like the girl\'s name, Frances. Everyone called me
Frank or Frankie anyway. Also, it was only a year or two after World
War Two and my hero was my uncle Tom, who had been a sergeant in the
army having fought from Africa through Italy to victory. I told the
lady that my name was Frank Thomas Smith. The lady yawned, put a paper
in her typewriter and typed me out a cool birth certificate, signed,
stamped, sealed and handed over. Thus, Baby boy Smith became Frank
Thomas Smith. Good choice.

**Holy Innocents**

When reading the following event, you may think, "What\'s the big deal
here? The choice was obvious." Nowadays maybe, but please understand
that way back then morality mores were different. Clark Gable caused a
sensation when he said, "I don\'t give a damn, Scarlet," in *Gone With
the Wind. *Sex was unseen and unheard in movies; even double beds
couldn\'t be shown because it implied that people of the opposite sex
slept together, let alone same-sex couples, who were unmentionable.
Furthermore, I had been brought up a Roman Catholic. My parents were
far from practicing, they preferred to sleep in their double bed to
going to mass Sunday mornings. But my Aunt Gertie decided to save my
soul before it was too late. She dragged me to mass every Sunday and
Holy Days of Obligation. I also had to attend religious instruction
for First Communion. I\'d had it drummed into me that messing around
with sex was seriously sinful and dangerous to body and soul ---
although there was little opportunity for playtime with the opposite
sex because girls were even more terrified than boys of mortal
damnation, also-known-as eternity in hell.

Ironically, it was Bill Desmond who started the whole thing, probably
because he was older and more interested in sex stuff than the rest of
the kids. It wasn't that we weren't interested, it's just that we
hadn't realized how interested we were until Bill brought it up. Bill
called a meeting at the basement entrance of the last building in the
row of apartments we all lived in on East 22nd^\ ^Street in the
Flatbush section of Brooklyn. The entrance led down a short flight of
steps into the basement, so if we sat on the steps, we couldn't be
seen by grownups passing by, although hardly any passed by there
anyway. There were Bill and Simon and me: the boys, and Muriel, Miriam
and Janet: the girls. Muriel was born sexy, not that she *was *sexy,
but she was very interested in sex. Like when we played our brand of
Leap Frog, when one kid would stand back against the wall and the next
kid would bend over and put his or her shoulder against his or her
waist and the others would form a line by putting their heads under
the ass and between the legs of the kid in front until a line of five
or six bent-over kids was formed that looked like a giant worm caught
on a hook. Then the first kid of the other team would run and leap up
over the line and land as far up on the worms back as possible. Then
the next until if all of the opposing team was able to jump on the
worm and not fall off and the worm didn't break, the worm won; if it
did break under the pressure the opposing team won. Our parents
thought it was good clean fun. Whenever I got to stick my head under
Muriel's ass, she started to squirm around on my neck and, if the game
lasted long enough, wet my collar. What a smell, wow! But she was
homely and had braces on her teeth.

Miriam was Puerto Rican, at least her parents were, and she was born
there. She was sexy too, but she was scared shitless of her father,
who would have beaten her to an inch of her life if he ever heard what
we were up to. She was kind of pretty, but her nose was too big.

Janet was different, dark, beautiful and shy and we were all secretly
in love with her. I say secretly because no boy at that age would dare
to admit that he had anything more than a passing interest in girls.
You know how it is. Janet kept still when your head was under her ass
and she didn't wiggle around when she jumped on your back either, like
Muriel did.

Bill had the habit of scratching his pimples when he was nervous. He
scratched his ass, too, which meant that he probably had pimples there
as well. His proposal was simple, direct and exhilarating. He wanted
to look at the girls' sex organs; in exchange, they could look at
ours. (He also informed us that Chinese girls pussies were horizontal,
whereas white girls\' pussies were vertical.) We all sort of sat there
with our mouths hanging open, turning various shades of pink. But no
one said no, so Bill went on. We should think of some place to go,
like one of the apartment house cellars (he had one in mind) and just
look. He made it sound scientific. Simon, to everyone's surprise, was
the first to agree, albeit monosyllabically: "When?" Bill, who had
never said a kind word to Simon until that moment, patted him on the
shoulder. "Soon," he said, "right now if you want." This was the
moment when I had to choose --- to risk eternity in hell in exchange
for a glimpse of some female pussies --- one in particular. I chose
the glimpse. (whew!)

"I don't want to go into no cellar," Janet said demurely. What did she
mean --- that she didn't want to do it at all, or she only didn't want
to do it in a cellar? I wanted to say something so they wouldn't hear
my heart beating, but I couldn't think of anything, so I just stared
at Janet's knees, pressed firmly together, imagining what wonders lay
north of them.

"It don't have to be no cellar," Muriel said. "Light's no good
anyway."

"We could take a flashlight," Bill insisted.

"Your parents both work, Miriam," Muriel, who didn't like the cellar
idea much either, said. "How about your place?"

"Oh no," Miriam gulped, "my father would kill me if he found out."

"Why should he find out?"

"Leave her alone if she don't want to \..." Simon began.

"I don\'t not want to, just not in my place," Miriam said and blushed
scarlet under her olive skin.

"I'll think of something," Bill offered. "The question is if you all
want to." He looked at the girls one by one, taking it for granted
that we boys certainly wanted to. The only girl who hadn't agreed
emphatically was Janet, but she was the most important one, possessing
the tropical Shangri-La between her legs that we all wanted to
examine, if only from a respectable distance. "I don't know," she
said. "I gotta think about it."

"What about right here" Simon said eagerly, "now?"

"Are you crazy?" Bill admonished and punched him on the same shoulder
he had fondly patted a minute before. "Any one of those windows could
open" --- he pointed upward with his thumb at four stories of
apartments above us --- "and we'd be seen. Shut your stupid trap if
you can't say nothing intelligent."

"I gotta think about it," Janet repeated and stood up from the step
she'd been sitting on and smoothed out her cute little skirt. (Girls
wore skirts then, remember?) I gotta go home now."

"Me too," Miriam said, and followed Janet around to the front of the
building. The rest of us sat there a while deep in dirty thoughts,
until Muriel, realizing she was the only girl left, jumped up and
yelled, "Hey, wait for me," and ran after them.

Bill sneezed three times hard and held his head. "Jeez, I got a
headache."

The next morning, Saturday, Simon rang my bell at eight o'clock. I was
up already; in fact, I woke up at six o\'clock and couldn't get back
to sleep for thinking about what we were planning and if anything
would come of it. My parents were sleeping, and my father yelled: "Who
the hell is that?" I told him it was only Simon and I had to go out.
He grumbled something and went back to sleep.

"I couldn't hardly sleep all night," Simon said as we ran down the
three flights of stairs. "Do you think the girls will do it?"

"Do what?" I was trying to seem calm about it.

"You know, *it*, what Bill said."

"How should I know?" Then, after letting Simon suffer a while, "They
seemed pretty hot to go, though. At least Muriel and Miriam."

"What do you think we should do?"

"About what?"

"About finding out whether they're gonna do it."

"Ask them, I guess."

"Yeah," Simon grinned. "Should we go ring their bells?"

"Nah, that'd be suspicious. They'll come out. It's Saturday."

"What about Bill?"

"What about him?

"Does he have to know?"

"It was his idea."

"Yeah, but he's a pain in the ass."

"And he'll bust our asses if we try to do it without him."

That convinced Simon that Bill couldn't be avoided, so we went to his
apartment and rang the bell. His mother opened the door: "Yeah?"

"Can Bill come out?" I asked her.

"Bill's sick, I think he's got the flu or somethin\', though I don't
know how he could have the flu in summer."

That was too bad, but I never saw a happier kid than Simon. Actually,
I was glad too, because Bill *was *a pain in the ass, although he
sometimes had good ideas. We hung around for an hour or so until the
other kids started coming out. We kept by ourselves though, like we
had a secret, which we did. Finally, Miriam appeared.

"Should we ask her if she wants to do it alone?" Simon asked.

"Nah, she'll never do it alone. Let's ask her to get Muriel and
Janet."

Simon ran up to her before she could get involved in something with
the other kids and said, "Hey, Miriam, how about gettin\' hold of
Janet and Muriel?" She didn't ask why, she knew. She ran to Muriel's
building first and about five minutes later we saw the two of them
running to Janet's building, and after another five minutes the three
of them came sashaying out arm in arm. Simon and I put our hands in
our pockets and walked towards them, not directly of course, kind of
diagonally, and at the last minute we swerved as though we'd just
thought of something and intercepted them.

"Hey," Simon said, his face all red. "How about doin\' it?" which was
probably the worst thing he could have said.

"Doing *what*?" Janet said, looking at me instead of Simon with her
big black eyes and throwing her hair back. God, she was beautiful.

"Ahr \... what Simon means is doing what we talked about yesterday."

"Where's Bill?" Muriel asked, looking like she wanted to drop her
panties right then and there.

"Bill's sick, can't come," Simon explained anxiously, "but that don\'t
matter, we're here."

"That makes us three to you two," Muriel said, probably disappointed
at having one less pecker to look at.

"Good," Janet said. "I'm not about to show anything to¬†*him*¬†anyway."

"You're right, Janet, absolutely right," Simon almost panted. "He's a
pain in the ass."

"Watch your language," Janet said, frowning.

"Yeah, watch your language," Muriel repeated. Simon looked like he
didn't know what language they meant and didn't say anything, which
was just as well.

"But where?" Miriam asked. "Not in my house, that's for sure."

They'd obviously already decided to go for it but were still worried
about the place. My mouth was dryer than the Sahara Desert, but I knew
I had to talk fast. "You know, the perfect place just occurred to me."
Like Hell! I'd been thinking about it since six o'clock in the
morning. They say that inspiration hits when you just wake up and
that's what happened to me. They were all looking at me expectantly.

"The church around the corner," I whispered, leaning close to the
girls.

"The Protestant one?" Miriam asked.

"That's the only one around the corner."

Janet, Miriam and I were Catholics and Muriel and Simon were Jewish,
so we couldn't have cared less about a Protestant church. In fact, it
was the perfect place to sin. There weren't many Protestants in
Brooklyn those days, probably still aren't, so they came from all
around to go to that church. All doomed to hell for being Protestants,
while we Catholics could go to confession any time and get to heaven
eventually. Muriel and Simon would probably go to the same place as
the Protestants, but that was their business.

"The church is locked on Saturdays," Janet said sensibly.

"I don't mean *inside* the church, I mean in these pits they have in
front of the basement windows." They all knew what I meant. In order
for the basement meeting hall to have natural light, rectangular
cavities had been cut into the ground and iron railings put around
them so no one would fall in. They were swell hiding places in games
when you had to hide, and we had all used them for that purpose until
everyone knew about them and they had become too obvious for hide and
seek.

"Yeah, that's perfect, Frankie!" Simon exclaimed, beside himself with
excitement.

"They're kinda small for all of us," Janet said.

"With Bill, yes," I agreed, "but we're not so many now."

"Let's just take a look," Muriel said. Good old Muriel.

"OK, but I still don't know," Janet said, looking at me again.

"Let's go," Simon said and started down the street. "C'mon!"

"No," Janet said. "You boys go the other way, around to Ditmas Avenue.
We'll go this way." See how smart she was?

"Sure," Simon agreed. "And we'll meet there."

Janet strode off quickly with the other girls at her heels. Simon was
hopping up and down in place, "C'mon, Frankie."

"Don't run," I admonished him, "everybody'll be looking at us."

"Hey, Frankie," one of the other boys yelled. "Where ya goin'? We're
gettin' up a game of stickball."

"Nowhere," I answered over my shoulder, and Simon and I walked as
casually as we could in the opposite direction from the one the girls
had taken. Once we'd turned the corner, though, we broke into a trot,
then a gallop, turned the other corner and finally came to the church.
The girls were nowhere in sight.

"Do you think they chickened out?" Simon asked, biting his nails.

"Nah, they're walkin'." We ran, that's all. A minute later they turned
the corner and approached us, Muriel and Miriam ahead and Janet now
hanging back a step or two. Simon and I entered the churchyard
cemetery, passed the time-worn tombstones (it was one of the oldest
churches in America) and waited at the railing of one of the cavities.
It was a perfect spot, well protected by two tall chestnut trees. When
the girls came into the cemetery, we climbed over the railing and
jumped into the cavity. We looked through the meeting hall window just
in case, but it was empty. "C'mon down," Simon whispered hoarsely to
the three girls peering down at us like full moons.

Muriel and Miriam were ready to climb over the railing, I'm sure, but
Janet said, "I'm not going down¬†*there*." She had class, you see.

"But how we gonna do it if you don't come down?" Simon pleaded.

"From up here," Janet said.

"Oh."

"You first," Muriel said, meaning us.

Simon fumbled with his fly and finally got his dick out. He was so
nervous he didn't even have a hard-on and it looked real puny there in
his palm. I was nervous, too, but I had half a hard-on at least. We
looked up and saw them gazing down at us with what I can only call a
mixture of interest and amusement. Passion? Not that I could tell. I
guess they were nervous too. Suddenly Muriel spread her legs like a
cowgirl getting ready to draw and pulled her panties to one side with
two fingers, revealing an incipient black bush of pubic hair. Muriel
did the same and we could see her pussy real well, because it was
covered with a transparent mantle of blonde hair. We stared at Janet's
knees. Finally, she shrugged, took up the cowgirl stance, placed two
fingers on her crotch and pulled aside her panties.

It was gorgeous, a plume of shiny dark hair with a crease in the
middle that allowed the essence of her pulchritude to shine through
like a purple sun. Our jaws dropped and Simon's dick began to grow and
glow like a sausage with special effects. Mine had long since reached
epic adolescent proportions. But the revelation lasted only a few
seconds. Janet released her fingers and the panties snapped back into
place eclipsing the sun. The other girls followed suit and they all
turned and left. Simon and I lay there primed to the gills. I won't
mention what we did then; I guess you can imagine.

At nine the next morning, Sunday, the phone rang. It was Simon.
"Meeting in a half hour, same place, the girls are coming," was all he
said in a voice that sounded like he was gasping for air. I got
dressed and was waiting at the meeting place when the others arrived.
Simon got right to the point.

"It was real good, I mean doing it, yesterday." He was still panting
for air. "Now I think we should do it again, but \... but \... but
this time you girls come down with us, one by one or in twos if you
think there's enough room, and this time we *touch *too."

We all gaped at him. A second later it came to me in a flash. Simon
wanted to utilize all of the five senses that we had learned about in
school. We'd already *seen*, now we would *touch*. Was there anything
to *hear*? I didn't see how there could be, but you never know. But
next would come *smell *and I knew from when I had my head between
Muriel's legs playing leapfrog that there was something to smell. And
*taste*? I pulled a curtain down over my mind. It was too much to even
contemplate. No one said anything. Were the girls having the same
thoughts? No, I couldn't believe that they were as perverse as us.

"It\'d be easy," Simon went on, still gasping, "you take off your
panties instead of just holding them aside and ...

"You sinful boy \...!" Our hearts boomed in unison as we looked up and
saw Mrs. McIntyre leaning out her first-floor window with yellow
curlers in her hair waving her fist down at us. "*Get out of here with
your filth.*" We stood up and ran, girls in one direction, boys in the
other. Her parting words reached me like an arrow piercing my heart:
"And I'm gonna tell YOUR mother!" Simon and I stopped running three
blocks away and leaned against a lamppost, panting. \"Sinful boy," she
said. Who'd she mean?"

"You, Simon," I said, worried that he wanted to pin it on me. "You
were the one doing the talking."

"Yeah, that's what I think, too. Whose mother do you think she meant?
She didn't say mothers, did she?

"No, but she might've meant it."

"Yeah. Janet's at least, they go to mass and novenas and all that crap
together."

I nodded. "Poor Janet. She won't tell Miriam's mother though. She
don't talk to Pordaricans."

"No," Simon agreed. "She don't talk to Jews neither if she can help
it, the old bitch, so that leaves Muriel and me off the hook."

"Yeah, but I'm Catlick."

"Yeah," Simon sighed. "Anyway, I guess that's the end of *it*."

That night the phone rang at home and Mom answered in the bedroom:
"Yes, Mrs. McIntyre, how are you? ... Oh? (long pause) \... Really?
\... \... (long pause) \... \... Yes, certainly, thank you for
calling, Mrs. McIntyre." Mom came into the living room where I was
reading a comic and stood for a second before me. I dared to look up
in time to see a faint smile on her face as she turned and walked into
the kitchen. That's when I learned for the first time what a great Mom
I had.

We didn't see the girls right away, Janet because she got hell and was
dragged off to confession immediately at Holy Innocents, the Catholic
Church nearest to us, about ten blocks away, and the other two because
they weren't allowed to come out. When Bill got better, he wanted to
take up where he left off, so we had to tell him what happened. At
first, he was furious that we had gone on without him, but when he
heard about Mrs. McIntyre yelling at Simon that he was a sinful boy,
he laughed and said, "Sinful Simon, that's who you are." The name
stuck and was soon shortened to just plain "Sin," which is what
everyone called him from then on.

To be continued\...

**Exile's End - a Memoir** is available in paperback and ebook from
[Barnes & Noble](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/exiles-end-frank-thomas-smith/1145558806?ean=9781948302616) and [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Exiles-End-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/1948302616)
