![](frank-always-right.jpg){class="alarge"}

# Frank is always right

## by Hernan Melana

Now that my friend Frank Thomas Smith has written his memoirs, or his
spiritual autobiography, as he calls it, or the biography of his
decisions, I wonder if he knows how many decisions he has made without
realizing that with them he has changed the lives of many of us who pass
close to him. I have not spent as much time or had as many talks with
him as I would have liked; life is like that. We are always have
obligations and urgencies that don\'t let us do what\'s important. But I
have been around long enough to play long chess matches over the course
of two decades, where we have had a parity that has allowed both of us
to like playing against each other. But chess was an excuse for me to
visit him. Now that I am far away, geographically speaking, I would like
to play another game.

I met him at the El Trigal school, which is the fruit of many efforts,
but which is a Waldorf school thanks to him. It was his impetus and his
convictions that gave that school its identity. My two daughters went
there and I became a teacher. The years when Frank was on the school\'s
Board of Directors, he was at the helm of the ship. You could say that
those were the best years of the institution, the golden years. Then,
when he left, citing age and fatigue, it was my turn to take the helm at
various times. I think I did quite well. They were not golden years, but
they were years of expansion, until the sailors lost the compass and the
astrolabe.\
With Frank I was in my first anthroposophical study group. We studied
Rudolf Steiner\'s Gospel according to Luke. I was a young professor of
history and theology of history, and he was an old anthroposophist.
There our destinies crossed forever. The genealogies of Matthew and
Luke, their apparent contradictions, the Jesus of Bethlehem, the Jesus
of Nazareth\... It was like finding a lost book under the pillow. It was
my decision. But Frank put me in the dilemma. The new world or the old
world. There I entered Rudolf Steiner\'s universe.

I remember once we debated a biblical topic. It was about Abraham. I
don\'t remember exactly what the topic was, but I told him he was right
(which was true). His response, on the other hand, I remember well: *It
is never too late to agree with me.\
*Over the years I have listened many times to his ideas and thoughts,
from the C.G. Jungian pipe-smoking years to the years when some said he
was an English agent or a CIA spy (conspiracy has always lived in
Traslasierra, perhaps the result of the excessive leisure of certain
inhabitants who migrated from the city to the mountains, with too many
resources to think too much and do too little), to the years when he
seemed like a Gandalf or a Dumbledore. He always gave precise
information: about the Anthroposophical Society, about the Goetheanum,
about Waldorf Pedagogy, about politics. Even about people close to him,
or about concrete situations. His pragmatism is overwhelming, but not
materialistic. Many times, against my will (and in solitude) I had to
say to myself: *That\'s right, on this or that subject it is as Frank
said, he is right. *

It is not necessary to say much more. When I sometimes argue with
someone, I feel like saying, as Frank says, when an interlocutor
expresses something crazy: *But, please, Queruidou, are you thinking
about what you are saying?* Of course, in this day and age, everyone
thinks he is right, but that magic formula only works for him, who is
half druid and half philosopher. Besides, because whoever likes him, and
whoever doesn\'t like him, Frank is (almost) always right.

Hernán Melana, May 2024

[Español](frank-siempre-tiene-razon.html)

The memoir referred to is available from Amazon as a paperback or
kindle:

[Exile's End -- a Memoir](https://www.amazon.com/Exiles-End-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/1948302616)
