# Anthroposophical Guidelines

![](guidelines-29-37-plus.jpg){class="a"}

## by Rudolf Steiner

### Numbers 29 -- 37 plus

29\. What acts in enhanced imaginative cognition is what lives in man's
psychic-spiritual interior and is the form in his physical body; and on
this foundation human existence unfolds in the physical world. The
physical body, ever and again renewing itself in its metabolism, stands
from birth (or rather conception) until death before the *continuously*
unfolding inner human being: the physical space-body becoming a
time-body.

30\. In inspired cognition, imaginative images depict what the human
being experiences in the time between death and a new birth in a
spiritual environment. Here is visible what man is in a cosmic context,
without his physical and etheric bodies through which he lived out his
earthly existence.

31\. In intuitive cognition the effects of previous incarnations on the
present one enter consciousness. These previous incarnations, in their
further development, have erased the connection they once had with the
physical world. They have become the pure spiritual core of the person
and as such are active in his current life. They are also an object of
the cognition that is the result of the unfolding of imagination and
inspiration.

32\. In the human head the physical organization is a copy of the
spiritual individuality. The physical and etheric parts of the head
stand as a self-contained image of the spiritual, and *alongside* them
the astral and "I" parts stand as autonomous psychic-spiritual being.
Therefore, the human head represents a juxtaposition of the relatively
autonomous physical and etheric on one hand, and the astral and
I-organization on the other.

33\. In the limbs/metabolism system, the four members of the human being
are intimately interconnected. The I-organization and the astral body
are *not* alongside the physical and etheric parts; they are *in* them;
they vivify them, activate their growth, capacity for movement and so
on. Therewith, however, the limbs/metabolism is like an evolving seed
which continually strives to become "head", and which is continually
prevented from doing so during man's earthly life.

34\. The rhythmic organization is in the middle. Here the I-organization
and the astral body alternately unite with and separate from the
physical and etheric parts. The physical facsimile of this
unification-separation process is breathing and blood circulation. The
in-breathing process depicts unification; the out-breathing process
separation. The processes in arterial blood depict unification; the
processes in venous blood depict separation.

35\. We understand the physical human being only if we think of him as
an *image* of the spiritual-psychic. By itself the physical human body
is incomprehensible. But in its various members it is an image of the
spiritual-psychic in various ways. The head is the most perfect,
complete sense-image. Everything which comprises the
metabolism-limbs-system is like an image whose form has not yet been
fully realized, but is still being composed. Everything which belongs to
the human rhythmic organization stands, in respect to the relationship
of the spiritual-psychic to the physical, between these contrapositions.

36\. Whoever contemplates the human head from this viewpoint finds help
in understanding spiritual imaginations; for in the head's form
imaginative forms are, so to speak, solidified to physical density.

37\. In the same way one can find help understanding Inspiration by
contemplating the rhythmic part of the human organization. The physical
aspect of life's rhythms bears the character of Inspiration as a
sense-image. In the metabolism-and limbs system one has, when one
contemplates it in full action in the development of its necessary or
possible functions, a sensible-supersensible image of the purely
supersensible Intuitive.

#### On the preceding Guidelines about the image-nature of man

It is of great importance that through Anthroposophy it should be made
clear that the ideas which one obtains by the observance of nature are
inadequate for the contemplation of man. The way of thinking which has
taken possession of human sentiment during the last centuries of
spiritual evolution sins against this challenge. One becomes used to
thinking about natural laws; and by means of these laws the natural
phenomena observed by the senses are explained. One then looks at the
human organism and thinks that it can also be explained by applying
natural laws to it.

This is like considering a picture which a painter created to be the
same as the substance of the colors used, as the strength used to apply
the colors to the canvas, or the method with which the colors are
painted on the canvas, and similar viewpoints. But all that does not
reveal what the picture manifests. Completely different principles live
in what the picture manifests than can be obtained by those methods.

One must be quite clear about the fact that in the human being something
also manifests itself which is not comprehensible from the point of view
of natural laws. If one is able to make this idea his own in the right
way, then one will be able to understand the human being *as* *image.
*In this sense, a mineral is not image. It only manifests what the
senses can directly perceive.

With images, sense observation is directed *through* what is perceived
to the content, which is grasped in the spirit. This is also the case
when contemplating the human being. If one contemplates man according to
natural laws in the right way, one does not approach what man truly is,
but only what is manifested through these laws.

One must realize that when the natural laws are applied to man it is as
if one were standing before a picture and only knows -- that's blue,
that's red -- and is incapable, through inner soul activity, of
associating the blue and the red to what these colors manifest.

One must perceive something quite different when applying natural laws
to a mineral substance and to a human being. From a spiritual viewpoint,
in the case of the mineral it is as though one were directly touching
what one sees; when applying natural laws to man it is as though one
stands as apart from him as one stands apart from a picture which one
does not see with the eye of the soul, but merely brushes with the
fingertips.

Once one understands in contemplating man, that he is the *image *of
something, then one is in the right soul-disposition to advance to what
this image represents.

And the image nature of man does not manifest itself in one explicit
way. A sense organ is essentially least of all an image, at most a kind
of manifestation of itself like a mineral. One can come closest to the
sense organs through natural laws. Just look at the wonderful
organization of the human eye. One *roughly* grasps this organization by
means of natural laws.* *And it is similar with the other sense organs,
although it is not so clearly the case as with the eye. It is because
the sense organs demonstrate a kind of self-containment in their forms.
They are included in the organism as completed formations, and as such
they impart perception of the outer world.

This is not the case with the rhythmic functions in the organism. They
do not manifest themselves as something complete. A continual generation
and degeneration of the organism takes place in them. If the sense
organs were like the rhythmic system, man would perceive the outer world
as being in a state of continuous becoming.

The sense organs manifest themselves like a picture that hangs on a
wall. The rhythmic system appears before us like what happens when we
contemplate the canvas and the painter in the process of creating a
picture. The picture does not yet exist, but it is in the process of
coming into existence. What has come into being remains, at first,
existent. This contemplation has to do only with a process of becoming.
In contemplating the human rhythmic system, the expiring, the
deconstruction, immediately connects to the coming into being, to the
construction. The rhythmic system manifests a *becoming* image.

The soul's act of dedicating itself to the observation of an object
which is a finished image may be called *Imagination*. The experience
which must unfold in order to grasp an image in the state of becoming
is, on the other hand, *Inspiration.*

It is a different story when one contemplates the metabolism and
movement system of the human organism. It is as though one were standing
before an empty canvas, paint-pots and an artist who has not yet begun
to paint. If one wishes to grasp the metabolic and limbs system, one
must develop a capacity for observance which has as little to do with
what the senses see when observing the paint pots and empty canvas as
these have to do with the artist's finished picture. And the activity
which the person experiences in his soul spiritually from the metabolism
and \[limb\] movements is comparable to when observing the painter,
empty canvas and paint-pots, he experiences the subsequently painted
picture. *Intuition *must be at work in the soul in order to grasp the
metabolic and limbs system.

It is necessary that the active members of the Anthroposophical Society
concentrate in this way on the Being which is the basis of
anthroposophical considerations. For not only should what is gained from
anthroposophical cognition be recognized, but also how one is able to
experience this knowledge.

What has been explained here will lead into the following Guidelines.

To be continued

Translated by Frank Thomas Smith

This book is available for purchase from Amazon: [Anthroposophical Guidelines](https://www.amazon.com/Anthroposophical-Guidelines-Rudolf-Steiner/dp/1948302411)
