![](/goya-letter.jpg)

# Letters to the Editor

RE: [Breathe](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html) by Becky Hemsley

I was sitting here in the dark listing out all tasks not completed - all
the life moments touching my heart - saddened by the closing.of a
favorite place and the loss of friends - when someone on PBS read this
poem. Thank you dear stranger who has become a friend I do not know. You
spoke to my heart in a manner that gave me pause to listen.

Thank you for this gift to a stranger who needed "Breathe" in her soul.

Kristi Dinell

RE: [Dreyfuss Trump or Biden On Israel](https://southerncrossreview.org/158/dreyfus-election.html)

I didn't read to the end your article on the Trump/Biden candidacies. To
read about them, and those who stand behind them, is like reading porn
or stuff that should get you a fail in elementary school. Utter mind
pollution. The struggle for a solution will go on, regardless of the
incompetence of either candidate which took 350 million people to put
where they are - unless they didn't, of course. So much for democracy.
F... that! Things are a changing now anyway; the old imperial hegemony,
that colonial mindset of old, NATO is breaking. BRICS is looking up. So,
relative to what is on offer internationally, a narrow viewing of US
mental death policy is perhaps growing less relevant than many are still
thinking, esp. in the inward looking US. I hardly recognize it; it ain't
my place, no sir.

Nick Maync-Matsumoto

\*\*\*

NEVER! NEVER! EVER!! NOT EVER, UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES WOULD I EVER,
EVER VOTE FOR TRUMP!!!  FOR ANYTHING!! EVER!!

 But I am devastated by Biden's approach and creation of this horrible
mess. I don't believe Trump would do any better, though he might do
something different. His soul deep corruption, dishonesty and on and on
make me want to vomit on him.  This is a rotten choice to have to make,
but I/we are going with Biden.

Barbara Fox

RE: [Frank is Always Right](href=https://southerncrossreview.org/158/frank-always-right.html)

I love this. Ah, qué tributo más bonito!

Jim Lowe

RE: [Exile\'s End - a Memoir](https://southerncrossreview.org/157/exiles-end-memoir.pdf)

I loved Lai\'s part, thanks for sharing.

I will never forget him, a great father. I did not remember him ever
wearing a watch!

Tiny input you may already know: When I was in primary school Lai kept a
stone from San Marcos he would turn over in the middle of the night. He
did that for a year, after that the stone was supposed to have
\"power\". 

2nd tidbit: Marcos told me every time he showed up at your post-IATA
office, they caught you and Lai playing chess. Final tiny correction:
Vegetarian Lai lived up to 93 yrs old (96 yrs appear twice in your
memoir). Born Apr 29, 1929, dide June 2022

Aivars Holms

\*\*\*

Lieber Frank, heute kam dein buch, ich werde es verschlingen\...\....

So bin ich  beruhigt, denn die letzte Geschihte FRANK IS ALWAYS RIGHT
gab mir die Zweifel,ob du noch lebst oder ob der AutorHernan  jetzt die
SCR weiterbetreibt und UEBER dich scheibt\.....

Es lebe Frances!!!

Ute Craemer

\*\*\*

RE: Memoir

Dear Cousin,

Congratulations on an impressive effort! Letting the world know who you
are, wanting to be sure you're not forgotten too quickly is a good
endeavor, I think. I address those issues with my paintings and
drawings. And some writing. To gather files, photographs and memories,
to consider what should be included and what should not be included,
what should be emphasized, what to include and what to leave out or
expunge, how you want to organize all that, what you want people to know
or think about you is overwhelming. I don't think I want to do that.
After I\'m gone the people who matter to me will think about me for an
awhile, I guess, perhaps through the three generations that already
exist and that will be the end of me.

Your memoir brought me face to face with all the thoughts about such
things; work you did to install Steiner's philosophy and world view into
being. All the people you met with, argued with, convinced to agree with
you and old Mr.S. All the children who were introduced to learning,
thinking, dance and art his way. Very admirable. Very time consuming,
very mind consuming. I hope you are pleased with result of all that
effort. I am very impressed! I hope you are pleased with your effort!
Are you?

Just a couple of things surprised me; So little reference to family and
children. Virtually no reference to Renate, or your other children. Were
they surprised about that? That absence disturbed me. I am glad you
wrote warmly about Maria Teresa. You attended lots of meetings, but you
had time to create a family along the way. It just indicates a lack of
connection and even respect. Or perhaps the memoir wasn't meant to be a
personal story, rather a story of your struggles and challenges in the
world of Anthroposophy. I have not meant to criticize, but I am a little
bewildered by parts of your book.

Much love,

Barbara Fox

RE: [The Fuming Salamander](https://southerncrossreview.org/158/fts-fuming-salamander.html) by Frank Thomas Smith

Muito legal!!!!

Ute Craemer

\*\*\*

Wonderful!

Raun Griffiths
