 

# The Military-Industrial Complex Is Killing Us All

![](MOC-tom-dispatch.jpg){class="a"}

### Freeing Ourselves from the Monster Destroying Our Planet and Our Futures

## By [David Vine](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/davidvine/) and [Theresa (Isa) Arriola](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/theresaarriola/)

We need to talk about what bombs do in war. Bombs shred flesh. Bombs
shatter bones. Bombs dismember. Bombs cause brains, lungs, and other
organs to shake so violently they bleed, rupture, and cease functioning.
Bombs injure. Bombs kill. Bombs destroy.

Bombs also make people rich.

When a bomb explodes, someone profits. And when someone profits, bombs
claim more unseen victims. Every dollar spent on a bomb is a dollar not
spent saving a life from a preventable death, a dollar not spent curing
cancer, a dollar not spent educating children. That's why, so long ago,
retired five-star general and President Dwight D. Eisenhower rightly
called spending on bombs and all things military a
"[theft](https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/address-the-chance-for-peace-delivered-before-the-american-society-newspaper-editors)."

The perpetrator of that theft is perhaps the world's most overlooked
destructive force. It looms unnoticed behind so many major problems in
the United States and the world today. Eisenhower famously warned
Americans about it in his 1961 [farewell
address](https://www.archives.gov/milestone-documents/president-dwight-d-eisenhowers-farewell-address),
calling it for the first time "the military-industrial complex," or the
MIC.

Start with the fact that, thanks to the MIC's ability to hijack the
federal budget, total annual military spending is [far
larger](https://tomdispatch.com/what-price-defense-2/) than most people
realize:
[around](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2023/05/07/getting-the-defense-budget-right-a-real-grand-total-over-1-4-trillion/)
\$1,500,000,000,000 ([\$1.5
trillion](https://monthlyreview.org/2023/11/01/actual-u-s-military-spending-reached-1-53-trillion-in-2022-more-than-twice-acknowledged-level-new-estimates-based-on-u-s-national-accounts/)).
Contrary to what the MIC scares us into believing, that incomprehensibly
large figure is monstrously [out of
proportion](https://tomdispatch.com/what-price-defense-2/) to the few
military threats facing the United States. One-and-a-half trillion
dollars is about double what [Congress
spends](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/blog/2023/05/31/parity-schmarity-military-big-winner-fy-2024-budget-deal/)
annually on all non-military purposes combined.

Calling this massive transfer of wealth a "theft" is no exaggeration,
since it's taken from pressing needs like ending hunger and
homelessness, offering free college and pre-K, providing universal
health care, and building a green energy infrastructure to save
ourselves from climate change. Virtually every major problem touched by
federal resources could be ameliorated or solved with fractions of the
cash claimed by the MIC. The money is there.

The bulk of our taxpayer dollars are seized by a relatively small group
of corporate [war
profiteers](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2021/09/02/top-defense-firms-see-2t-return-on-1b-investment-in-afghan-war/)
led by the [five
biggest](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2021/ProfitsOfWar)
companies
[profiting](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2023/08/07/americas-top-5-weapons-contractors-made-196b-in-2022/)
off the war industry: Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Raytheon (RTX),
Boeing, and General Dynamics. As those companies have profited, the MIC
has sowed incomprehensible destruction globally, keeping the United
States locked in endless wars that, since 2001, have killed an estimated
[4.5
million](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/IndirectDeaths)
people, injured tens of millions more, and displaced at least [38
million](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/human/refugees),
according to Brown University's [Costs of War
Project](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/human).

The MIC's hidden domination of our lives must end, which means we must
dismantle it. That may sound totally unrealistic, even fantastical. It
is not. And by the way, we're talking about dismantling the MIC, not the
military itself. (Most members of the military are, in fact, among that
the MIC's victims.)

While profit has long been part of war, the MIC is a relatively new,
post-World War II phenomenon that formed thanks to a series of choices
made over time. Like other processes, like other choices, they can be
reversed and the MIC can be dismantled.

The question, of course, is *how?*

#### The Emergence of a Monster

To face what it would take to dismantle the MIC, it's first necessary to
understand how it was born and what it looks like today. Given its
startling size and intricacy, we and a team of colleagues created a
[series of graphics](http://www.dismantlethemic.org/) to help visualize
the MIC and the harm it inflicts, which we're sharing publicly for the
first time.

The MIC was born after World War II from, as
[Eisenhower](https://www.archives.gov/milestone-documents/president-dwight-d-eisenhowers-farewell-address)
explained, the "conjunction of an immense military establishment" ---
the Pentagon, the armed forces, intelligence agencies, and others ---
"and a large arms industry." Those two forces, the *military* and the
*industrial*, united with Congress to form an unholy "[Iron
Triangle](https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Politics_of_Defense_Contracting/HjnSDwAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=0)"
or what some
[scholars](https://archive.nytimes.com/schott.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/01/25/guest-post-james-ledbetter-on-50-years-of-the-military-industrial-complex/)
believe Eisenhower initially and more accurately called the
[military-industrial](https://www.thefreelibrary.com/The+Permanent-War+Complex%3A+Industry+in+the+cockpit%3A+what+Eisenhower...-a0559832456)--[congressional
complex](https://www.thefreelibrary.com/The+Permanent-War+Complex%3A+Industry+in+the+cockpit%3A+what+Eisenhower...-a0559832456).
To this day those three have remained the heart of the MIC, locked in a
self-perpetuating cycle of legalized corruption (that also features all
too many illegalities).

The basic system works like this: First, Congress takes exorbitant sums
of money from us taxpayers every year and gives it to the Pentagon.
Second, the Pentagon, at Congress's direction, turns huge chunks of that
money over to weapons makers and other corporations via all too
lucrative contracts, gifting them tens of billions of dollars in
profits. Third, those contractors then use a portion of the profits to
lobby Congress for yet more Pentagon contracts, which Congress is
generally thrilled to provide, perpetuating a [seemingly endless
cycle](https://jacobin.com/2022/10/pentagon-budget-military-contractors-lobbyists-biden).

![](MOC-tom-dispatch-2.jpg){class="b"}

But the MIC is more complicated and insidious than that. In what's
effectively a system of legalized bribery, [campaign
donations](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/congress-ndaa-vote/)
regularly help [boost Pentagon
budgets](https://www.citizen.org/article/military-industrial-complex-contributions-report/)
and ensure the awarding of yet more lucrative contracts, often
[benefiting](https://tomdispatch.com/congress-has-been-captured-by-the-arms-industry/)
a small number of contractors in a congressional district or state. Such
contractors make their case with the help of a virtual army of more than
[900](https://www.opensecrets.org/industries/lobbying?cycle=2024&ind=D)
Washington-based
[lobbyists](https://tomdispatch.com/unwarranted-influence-twenty-first-century-style/).
Many of them are former[ Pentagon
officials](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/pentagon-revolving-door/),
or former members of Congress or congressional staffers, [hired
through](https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2023/05/revolving-door-lobbyists-help-defense-contractors-get-off-to-strong-start-in-2023/)
a "[revolving
door](https://www.pogo.org/analysis/the-pentagons-revolving-door-keeps-spinning-2021-in-review)"
that takes advantage of their ability to lobby former colleagues. Such
[contractors](https://jacobin.com/2022/09/congress-pentagon-budget-think-tanks-military)
also
[donate](https://quincyinst.org/research/defense-contractor-funded-think-tanks-dominate-ukraine-debate/#executive-summary)
to [think
tanks](https://quincyinst.org/research/restoring-trust-in-the-think-tank-sector/#executive-summary)
and university centers willing to support increased Pentagon spending,
weapons programs, and a hyper-militarized foreign policy.
[Ads](https://jacobin.com/2023/10/rtx-raytheon-lockheed-dc-metro-advertising/)
are another way to [push weapons
programs](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/defense-industry-lobby/) on
elected officials.

Such weapons makers also
[spread](https://tomdispatch.com/congress-has-been-captured-by-the-arms-industry/)
their manufacturing among as many Congressional districts as possible,
allowing senators and representatives to claim credit for jobs created.
MIC jobs, in turn, often create cycles of dependency in low-income
communities that have few other economic drivers, effectively buying the
support of locals.

For their part, contractors regularly engage in[ legalized price
gouging](https://www.cbsnews.com/amp/news/pentagon-budget-price-gouging-military-contractors-60-minutes-2023-05-21/),
overcharging taxpayers for all manner of weapons and equipment. In other
cases, [contractor
fraud](https://www.sanders.senate.gov/press-releases/fraudulent-defense-contractors-paid-1-trillion/)
literally [steals](https://man.fas.org/eprint/contract-fraud.pdf)
taxpayer money. The Pentagon is the only [government
agency](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/pentagon-audit-2666415734/)
that has [never passed an
audit](https://www.taxpayer.net/budget-appropriations-tax/why-cant-the-pentagon-pass-an-audit/)
--- meaning it literally can't keep track of its money and assets ---
yet it still receives more from Congress than every other government
agency combined.

![](MOC-tom-dispatch-3.jpg){class="b"}

As a system, the MIC ensures that Pentagon spending and military policy
are driven by contractors' search for ever-higher profits and the
reelection desires of members of Congress, not by any assessment of how
to best defend the country. The resulting military is [unsurprisingly
shoddy](https://harpers.org/archive/2019/06/the-pentagon-syndrome/),
especially given the money spent. Americans should pray it never
actually has to defend the United States.

No other industry --- not even Big Pharma or Big Oil --- can match the
power of the MIC in[
shaping](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/06/21/pentagon-budget-congress-bipartisanship/)
national policy and dominating spending. Military spending is, in fact,
now
[larger](https://quincyinst.org/research/more-money-less-security-pentagon-spending-and-strategy-in-the-biden-administration/#introduction-more-spending-doesnt-mean-more-security)
(adjusting for inflation) than at the height of the wars in Vietnam,
Afghanistan, or Iraq, or, in fact, at any time since World War II,
despite the absence of a threat remotely justifying such spending. Many
now realize that the primary beneficiary of more than 22 years of
endless U.S. wars in this century has been the *industrial* part of
the MIC, which has made hundreds of billions of dollars since 2001. "Who
Won in Afghanistan? Private Contractors" was the *Wall Street
Journal*'s all too apt headline in 2021.

#### Endless Wars, Endless Death, Endless Destruction

"Afghanistan" in that headline could have been replaced by Korea,
Vietnam, or Iraq, among other seemingly endless U.S. wars since World
War II. That the MIC has profited off them is no coincidence. It has
helped drive the country into
[conflicts](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520300873/the-united-states-of-war)
in countries ranging from Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, to El
Salvador, Guatemala, Panama, and Grenada, to Afghanistan, Libya,
Somalia, and so many others.

![](MOC-tom-dispatch-4.jpg){class="b"}

Deaths and injuries from such wars have reached the tens of millions.
The number of estimated deaths from the [post-9/11
wars](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/IndirectDeaths) in
Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Syria, and Yemen is eerily similar to that
from the wars in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia: 4.5 million.

The numbers are so large that they can become numbing. The Irish poet
[Pádraig Ó Tuama](https://onbeing.org/poetry/the-pedagogy-of-conflict/)
helps us remember to focus on:

one life\
one life\
one life\
one life\
one life

because each time\
is the first time\
that that life\
has been taken.

#### The Environmental Toll

The MIC's damage extends to often irreparable[ environmental
harm](https://cdnsciencepub.com/doi/full/10.1139/er-2015-0039#sec-6),
involving the poisoning of ecosystems, devastating biodiversity loss,
and the U.S. [military's carbon
footprint](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/ClimateChangeandCostofWar),
which is larger than that of any other organization on earth. At war or
in daily training, the MIC has literally [fueled global
heating](https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262047487/the-pentagon-climate-change-and-war/)
and climate change through the burning of fuels to run bases, operate
vehicles, and produce weaponry.

![](MOC-tom-dispatch-5.jpg){class="b"}

The MIC's human and environmental costs are particularly invisible
outside the continental United States. In U.S. territories and other
political "grey zones," investments in military infrastructure and
technologies rely in part on the [second-class
citizenship](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/made-by-history/wp/2017/09/28/most-countries-have-given-up-their-colonies-why-hasnt-america/)
of Indigenous communities, often dependent on the military for their
livelihoods.

#### Endless Wars at Home

As the MIC has fueled wars abroad, so it has fueled militarization
domestically. Why, for example, have domestic police forces become so
militarized? At least part of the answer: since 1990, Congress has
allowed the Pentagon to transfer its "excess" weaponry and equipment
(including tanks and drones) to local law enforcement agencies. These
transfers conveniently allow the Pentagon and its contractors to ask
Congress for replacement purchases, further fueling the MIC.

Seeking new profits from new markets, contractors have also increasingly
hawked their military products directly to SWAT teams and other police
forces, border patrol outfits, and prison systems. Politicians and
corporations have poured billions of dollars into[ border
militarization](https://www.southernborder.org/border_lens_border_militarization)
and mass incarceration, helping fuel the rise of the lucrative
"[border-industrial
complex](https://jacobin.com/2022/05/joe-biden-us-mexico-border-industrial-complex-technology-wall-patrol)"
and "[prison-industrial
complex](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1998/12/the-prison-industrial-complex/304669/),"
respectively. Domestic militarization has
[disproportionately](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1805161115)[
harmed](https://mappingpoliceviolence.org/)[
Black](https://www.prisonpolicy.org/research/race_and_ethnicity/),
[Latino](https://www.southernborder.org/border_lens_border_militarization),
and [Indigenous
communities](https://www.ohchr.org/en/press-releases/2009/10/militarization-indigenous-areas-growing-threat-permanent-forum-told).

![](MOC-tom-dispatch-6.jpg){class="b"}

#### An Existential Threat

Some will defend the military-industrial complex by insisting that we
need its jobs; some by claiming it's keeping Ukrainians alive and
protecting the rest of Europe from Vladimir Putin's Russia; some by
warning about China. Each of those arguments is an example of the degree
to which the MIC's power relies on systematically manufacturing fear,
threats, and crises that help enrich arms merchants and others in the
MIC by driving ever more military spending and war (despite a nearly
unbroken record of catastrophic failure when it comes to nearly every
U.S. conflict since World War II).

The argument that current levels of military spending must be maintained
for "the jobs" should be laughable. No military should be a jobs
program. While the country needs job programs, military spending has
[proven](https://www.routledge.com/Six-Stops-on-the-National-Security-Tour-Rethinking-Warfare-Economies/Pemberton/p/book/9780367257675)
to be a poor job creator or an engine of economic growth.
[Research](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/economic/economy/employment)
shows it creates far fewer jobs than comparable investments in health
care, education, or infrastructure.

U.S. weaponry has aided Ukrainian self-defense, though the weapons
manufacturers are anything but altruists. If they truly cared about
Ukrainians, they would have forgone any profits, leaving more money for
humanitarian aid to that country. Instead, they've used that war, as
they have Israel's genocidal war on Gaza and growing tensions in the
Pacific, to cynically inflate their profits and stock prices
dramatically.

Discard the fearmongering and it should be clear that the Russian
military has demonstrated its weakness, its inability to decisively
conquer territory near its own borders, let alone march into Europe. In
fact, both the Russian and Chinese militaries
[pose](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/ChinaUSspending)
no conventional military threat to the United States. The Russian
military's annual budget is
[one-tenth](https://www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2023/russias-new-budget-law-signals-determination-see-war-ukraine-through-according-new-sipri-analysis)
or less than the size of the U.S. one. [China's military
budget](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/papers/2023/ChinaUSspending)
is one-third to one-half its size. The disparities are far larger if you
[combine](https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2024-04/2404_fs_milex_2023.pdf)
the U.S. military budget with those of its NATO and Asian allies.

Despite this, members of the MIC are increasingly encouraging direct
confrontations with Russia and China, aided by Putin's war and China's
own provocations. In the "Indo-Pacific" (as the military calls it), the
MIC is continuing to cash in as the Pentagon [builds
up](https://progressive.org/magazine/build-back-much-much-worse-vine-20230823/)
bases and forces surrounding China in Australia,
[Guam](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/jul/26/guam-fears-becoming-target-over-planned-15bn-us-defence-system),
the Federated States of Micronesia, Japan, the Marshall Islands, the
Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, and the
[Philippines](https://www.stripes.com/theaters/asia_pacific/2023-05-07/subic-bay-philippines-navy-base-10046853.html).

Such steps and a[ similar
buildup](https://progressive.org/magazine/build-back-much-much-worse-vine-20230823/)
in Europe are only encouraging China and Russia to strengthen their own
militaries. (Just imagine how American politicians would respond if
China or Russia were to build a single military base anywhere close to
this country's borders.) While all of this is increasingly profitable
for the MIC, it is heightening the risk of a military clash that could
spiral into a potentially species-ending nuclear war between the United
States and China, Russia, or both.

#### The Urgency of Dismantling

The urgency of dismantling the military-industrial complex should be
clear. The future of the species and planet depends on it.

The most obvious way to weaken the MIC would be to starve it of its
lifeblood, our tax dollars. Few noticed that, after leaving office,
former Trump-era Pentagon chief [Christopher
Miller](https://thehill.com/policy/defense/3852632-former-acting-defense-chief-under-trump-calls-for-military-budget-to-be-cut-in-half/)
called for cutting the Pentagon's budget in half. Yes, in half.

Even a 30% cut --- as happened all too briefly after the Cold War ended
in 1991 --- would free hundreds of billions of dollars annually. Imagine
how such sums could build safer, healthier, more secure lives in this
country, including a just economic transition for any military personnel
and contractors losing jobs. And mind you, that military budget would
still be significantly larger than China's, or Russia's, Iran's, and
North Korea's combined.

Of course, even thinking about cutting the Pentagon budget is difficult
because the MIC has captured both political parties, virtually
guaranteeing ever-rising military spending. Which brings us back to the
puzzle of how to dismantle the MIC as a system.

In short, we're working on the answers. With the diverse [group of
experts](http://www.dismantlethemic.org/) who helped produce this
article's graphics, we're exploring, among [other
ideas](http://www.wordsaboutwar.org/), divestment campaigns and
lawsuits; banning war profiteering; regulating or nationalizing weapons
manufacturers; and converting parts of the military into an unarmed
disaster relief, public health, and infrastructure force.

Though all too many of us will continue to believe that dismantling the
MIC is unrealistic, given the threats facing us, it's time to think as
boldly as possible about how to roll back its power, resist the invented
notion that war is inevitable, and build the world we want to see. Just
as past movements reduced the power of Big Tobacco and the railroad
barons, just as some are now taking on Big Pharma, Big Tech, and the
prison-industrial complex, so we must take on the MIC to build a world
focused on making human lives rich (in every sense) rather than one
focused on bombs and other weaponry that brings wealth to a select few
who benefit from death.

Copyright 2024 Theresa (Isa) Arriola and David Vine

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [David Vine](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/davidvine/)

**David Vine**, a [*TomDispatch*
regular](https://tomdispatch.com/david-vine-trumping-democracy-in-america-s-empire-of-bases/)
and professor of anthropology at American University, is the author most
recently of [*The United States of War: A Global History of America\'s
Endless Conflicts, from Columbus to the Islamic
State*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0520385683/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
He is also the author of [*Base Nation: How U.S. Military Bases Abroad
Harm America and the
World*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1627791698/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
part of the [American Empire
Project](https://us.macmillan.com/series/americanempireproject/).

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/davidvine/)

#### [Theresa (Isa) Arriola](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/theresaarriola/)

**Theresa (Isa) Arriola** is an assistant professor in the
department of sociology and anthropology at Concordia University. She
chairs [Our Common Wealth
670](https://www.instagram.com/ourcommonwealth670/?hl=en) (OCW 670) on
Saipan, a community advocacy group dedicated to research, education, and
awareness about military planning in the Mariana Islands. She was born
and raised on Saipan and is an Indigenous Chamorro woman. Her research
interests center around militarism, indigeneity, sovereignty, and
Oceania.

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://TomDispatch.com) where this article originally appeared -- without the title image.
