# The Candidate from Hell

![](engelhardt-trump-from-hell.jpg){class="a"}


### The Man of the Moment (And What a Moment It Is!)

## By [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Donald Trump is all too literally the candidate from hell and, yes, he's
threatening to take the United States and the world to --- no place
else! --- hell and back. He's the greatest danger to this planet
imaginable. And I'm not even thinking about what else he'd do, were he
to win election 2024 and return to the Oval Office, having
[reassured](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/jul/30/donald-trump-wont-have-to-vote-anymore-fox-interview)
his religious voters that, should they opt for him this November,
they'll never have to do so again. ("Get out and vote, just this time...
You won't have to do it anymore. Four more years, you know what? It'll
be fixed, it'll be fine, you won't have to vote anymore, my beautiful
Christians.")

Forget all of that, including the
[racism](https://www.npr.org/2024/08/03/g-s1-15174/harris-mixed-race-trump-black-indian),
the madness, the
[urge](https://www.npr.org/2023/12/19/1220443867/trump-s-rhetoric-is-drawing-alarming-comparisons-to-autocratic-leaders-and-dicta)
to transform this country into the all-American equivalent of an
autocracy. Forget every last bit of it --- even if, yes, that's one hell
of a lot to forget! Instead, focus on just one thing: Donald Trump and
his crew, including that gem J.D. Vance, who attacked what he called
"[the Green New
Scam](https://www.eenews.net/articles/j-d-vance-leads-attacks-on-green-new-scam-at-convention/)"
at the Republican convention, are determined to fossil-fuelize our
future in a fashion never before seen, not at least under these
circumstances.

And unfortunately, Donald Trump is anything but alone. (Do you hear me,
[Vladimir
Putin](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2024/03/12/despite-putin-promises-russias-emissions-keep-rising/)?)
In fact, according to a recent [*Guardian*
report](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/aug/05/climate-change-denial-congress),
almost one-quarter of this country's congressional representatives (100
members of the House and 23 senators) deny the very existence of climate
change --- and be shocked, very shocked, but every last one of them is a
Republican! In what now passes for the mainstream, The Donald and his
vice-presidential buddy, the very opposite of "[cat
ladies](https://www.npr.org/2024/07/29/nx-s1-5055616/jd-vance-childless-cat-lady-history),"
are extreme but all too common examples of the urge to heat this planet
to the boiling point or beyond. Admittedly, the competition is fierce.
After all, whatever steps President Joe Biden took in relation to
climate change --- and he did [take
them](https://grist.org/politics/one-year-in-the-inflation-reduction-act-is-working-kind-of/)
and they will make a difference --- American [oil
production](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61545) and
[oil](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61584) and
[natural
gas](https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/us-was-top-lng-exporter-2023-hit-record-levels-2024-01-02/)
exports all set staggering new global records during his term in office.

Still, there's no question about one thing: Donald Trump, J.D. Vance,
and crew are determined to fully reject that Green New Scam (as
Republicans now love to call it), which means the two of them are intent
on making you, me, and everyone else on this planet sweat, sweat, sweat.
I say that given the fact that, only recently, humanity experienced the
hottest day ever recorded and the [very next
day](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/07/23/hottest-day-ever-recorded-climate-change/)
set an even more feverish daily global record. And that, mind you, was
after 13 straight months each of which (including two Junes) set new
heat records for human history (and probably far beyond it), and all of
that, in turn (if you don't mind the longest, hottest sentence
imaginable), came after 2023 set a global record as the hottest year
ever --- and count on this: I'm undoubtedly leaving all sorts of things
out.

Yikes, I'm already sweating!

**A Green New Scam President?**

Given the recent withdrawal of 81-year-old Joe Biden from the
presidential race, 78-year-old Donald Trump is now the oldest American
presidential candidate ever (yes, ever!), so why should he give a damn
about how hot our future could become? Admittedly, there are his kids
and grandkids to consider, but it's not clear that, even when it comes
to them (and despite his recent
[family-ization](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/maga-wing-trump-family-takes-center-stage-rcna161293)
of the Republican convention), he gives a damn about anyone other
than... yes, Donald Trump. Based on the last few years of him, I doubt
it. In the most literal sense possible, as far as he's concerned, he's
always the man of the moment. Any moment. And if the moment isn't his,
then to hell with it and everything else!

And believe me, under the circumstances, I'm not just using "hell"
figuratively.

After all, this planet and this country are both growing hotter all too
quickly. This was already one hell of a summer in the United States.
State after state, city after city [simply
broiled](https://www.eenews.net/articles/j-d-vance-leads-attacks-on-green-new-scam-at-convention/),
while records were regularly set across the globe. (Hey, Las Vegas hit a
[new city
high](https://www.npr.org/2024/07/08/nx-s1-5032849/las-vegas-hits-a-new-record-high-of-120-degrees-fahrenheit)
of 120 degrees Fahrenheit in July and, in breaking local heat records,
it was anything but atypical.) After all, June, as I mentioned, was the
[13th straight hottest
month](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/07/11/climate/global-warming-heat-records.html)
of its kind ever. And while later in the summer, we might get a slight
break from such record-setting temperatures, the future looks all too
grim. While you're at it, consider yourself lucky that you don't live in
someplace like Dubai, where on one recent anything-but-atypical July day
the temperature hit 113 and the heat index 144. In fact, the *Washington
Post* now
[suggests](https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2024/07/18/persian-gulf-dubai-heat-climate/)
that the Persian Gulf region may be the "most likely to regularly exceed
life-threatening heat thresholds during the next 30 to 50 years."

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0872868060/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Of course, only this summer, Donald Trump held a rally in Phoenix,
Arizona, where the temperature hit... go ahead, just for hell of it,
take a guess!

Yes, [113
degrees](https://www.npr.org/2024/06/25/nx-s1-5006573/trump-election-2024-climate-change-fossil-fuels)!
Eleven of his listeners were treated right there for heat exhaustion on
"stretchers hooked to IV bags," while The Donald continued to "rail
against wind turbines and electric vehicles." And mind you, unlike the
acts of the assassin whose bullet hit Trump's ear at that rally in
Butler, Pennsylvania, the former president's statements in Arizona
blasting any efforts to deal with this overheating globe of ours weren't
considered acts of violence.

And I'm not even including [Project
2025](https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2024/07/what-project-2025-would-do-to-climate-policy-in-the-us/),
a Heritage Foundation greenhouse-gas nightmare of a document prepared
for the possible second term of the president who called climate change
"[a great
hoax](https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2022/03/06/trump-focuses-foreign-policy-speech-gops-top-donors/)"
and once [said
sarcastically](https://democrats.org/news/donald-the-denier-donald-trump-has-repeatedly-called-climate-change-a-hoax/),
"The oceans are going to rise 1/100th of an inch in the next 300 years
and it's going to kill everybody," while
[insisting](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/jun/03/trump-big-oil-campaign-pitch-corruption)
"that windmills cause cancer and that electric cars are 'bad' for the
environment." After all, despite the fact that so many of Project 2025's
creators at that "[notorious rightwing climate-denying think
tank](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/jul/27/project-2025-dismantle-us-climate-policy-next-republican-president)"
were former Trumpian officials and J.D. Vance is [closely
tied](https://newrepublic.com/article/184393/jd-vance-violent-foreword-kevin-roberts-project-2025-leader-book)
to it, the former president has
[claimed](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/project-2025-trump-heritage-foundation-what-know-rcna161338)
it has absolutely nothing to do with him. Still, here's the Trumpian
essence of it all: he's always been a fossil-fuelizer of the first
order; the oil and gas industry has
[backed](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/jun/03/trump-big-oil-campaign-pitch-corruption)
his presidential runs big-time; and he seems desperately eager to do it
all (and more) again. As he so classically put the matter during this
election campaign: on day one back in the Oval Office, he's going to
[act
like](https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2024/05/22/donald-trump-oil-industry-fundraiser/73803933007/)
a "dictator**"** and, above all, institute a "drill, baby, drill" regime
for the next four years (and undoubtedly beyond). He and his key
officials the second time around are going to do their damnedest, in
other words, to encourage the long-term, full-scale overheating of this
planet.

The plans that he and J.D. Vance have when it comes to fossil fuels
should make anyone's hair stand on end (even someone as bald as me).
After all, he's already promised that, above all else, when he next
enters the Oval Office, his main goal will be to "[drill, baby,
drill](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/jun/10/trump-rallies-extreme-heat)."
You can't be more blunt than that when it comes to encouraging the
fossil-fuel companies from whom you recently
[demanded](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2024/05/09/trump-oil-industry-campaign-money/)
a fortune in election funding.

And that's obviously just the beginning. He and his crew have [promised
to](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/26/climate/climate-policies-trump-would-reverse.html)
wipe out anything the Biden administration did aimed at dealing with
climate change and fossil fuels while nixing any steps taken to support
the creation of clean energy. Instead, he would "develop the liquid gold
that is right under our feet" and "unleash domestic energy production
like never before." From obliterating wind power projects ("[I hate
wind](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/04/17/trump-wind-power-oil-executives/)")
to promoting oil and natural gas drilling from the Gulf of Mexico to the
Alaskan Arctic, there's no end to what he and his cronies have in mind.
He and his "team" may even be ready to systematically dismantle, if not
[obliterate](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2024/feb/09/trump-epa-plan-environment)
the Environmental Protection Agency (which, in case you've forgotten,
was created in 1970 by a Republican president, Richard Nixon, who did
little else right). Donald Trump's next presidency, in other words, will
clearly force the U.S. government to literally worship at the foot (or
the oil rig) of the fossil-fuel companies.

**The Slow-Motion Equivalent of a Nuclear War**

To put all of this in some grim perspective, the British outfit Carbon
Brief estimated that, by 2030, a Trump presidency would add
[approximately four billion more
tons](https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-trump-election-win-could-add-4bn-tonnes-to-us-emissions-by-2030/)
of greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere than another Biden
administration (or, assumedly, one run by [Kamala
Harris](https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2024/07/how-kamala-harris-and-donald-trump-compare-on-climate-change/)).
And all of that means that a country and a world already overheating at
a record pace would do so in an even more dramatically grim fashion.

The startling thing is that, on this distinctly overheating planet of
ours, a person whose platform is essentially an oil or natural
gas-drilling rig should have the faintest chance of being elected
president. It's not all that complicated really. Leaving aside any other
issue, voting for Donald Trump in our already rapidly warming world
would be --- all too literally --- a suicidal act.

And keep in mind that, even before Donald Trump returns to the Oval
Office a second time (should he win in November), the news daily has
gotten ever worse. As a start, we're talking about a country that, in
the Biden years and despite the money that he and his crew began
[investing](https://www.americanprogress.org/article/the-biden-administration-has-taken-more-climate-action-than-any-other-in-history/)
in climate-change-mitigating activities, [set its
sixth](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61545)
consecutive yearly record in 2023 for producing oil (more than any other
country on the planet) and another for exporting
[oil](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61584) and
[natural gas](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61823),
while the giant U.S. oil companies continued to garner [record
profits](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/02/business/oil-gas-companies-profits.html).

Of course, climate change is hardly the only danger on planet Earth
right now. There's the potentially explosive set of horrors underway in
Gaza and elsewhere in the Middle East that could erupt into something
far worse at any moment. (Ominously enough, the U.S. only [recently
dispatched](https://www.npr.org/2024/08/03/nx-s1-5062390/us-military-deployment-middle-east-israel-iran)
yet more warships and planes to the region.) And there are other
dangers, including the possibility of a future war with China, a
potential [nuclear
face-off](https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-war-putin-nuclear-weapons-82ced2419d93ae733161b56fbd9b477d)
with Russia, or even (should Donald Trump lose the election this year),
a rise in violence in this country, if not some possible version of a
[civil
war](https://www.wdtn.com/news/your-local-election-hq/local-state-senator-apologizes-for-civil-war-remark-during-vance-rally/)
here at home.

But put in proper perspective, climate change should be seen as the
slow-motion equivalent of a nuclear war on this planet, one that --- not
in a day, a week, a month, or a year --- but over the decades to come,
could make our world ever less livable, ever less ours. While a
full-scale nuclear exchange could almost instantly create a "nuclear
winter" that [might
result](https://www.rutgers.edu/news/nuclear-war-would-cause-global-famine-and-kill-billions-rutgers-led-study-finds)
in up to five billion of us dying of hunger, climate change could
devastate this planet in a similarly horrific fashion, just over the
(very) long term.

So, consider a vote for Donald Trump a vote for nothing less than
destroying the Earth as a livable environment for... well, all of those
to come. And given the apocalyptic nature of that, don't you find it
strange that Trump's climate-change views and his ultimate support for
the fossil fuel industry above all else (except himself) haven't gotten
more attention in this election season?

Anyone who lived through the last blistering year should realize that
global heat of an unprecedented sort isn't anywhere near a high point
but, given the fossil fuels still pouring into the atmosphere (including
[staggering
amounts](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/article/2024/jul/30/methane-emissions-study)
of methane, a gas that heats the planet faster than any other), at
something closer to a low point. And under the circumstances, Donald
("drill, baby, drill") Trump should be considered, not figuratively but
all too literally, the presidential candidate from... yes, hell. Voting
for him would be voting for, in historical (and Christian) terms, the
devil and that's not just an image but potentially an all-too-literal
reality.

As president, Donald Trump would undoubtedly prove to be a first-class
global heat machine and voting for him would be the slow-motion
equivalent of putting an atomic weapon in the Oval Office. Quite a
prospect, don't you think?

Copyright 2024 Tom Engelhardt

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[*TomDispatch.com*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He is also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [*The
End of Victory
Culture*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Thanks to [Tomdispatch.com](TomDispatch.com) where this article originaly appeared, without the title image. 
