# Favela Children - Chapter 13

![](favela-cover.jpg){class="a"}

## by Ute Creamer

#### Chapter 13

December 1974

My class, the sixth grade, and I decided to organize a Christmas party
for poor children. We rehearsed a simple manger play in Portuguese. We
worked for weeks making hand-made presents, in the school as well as at
home: Some knitted dolls and animals, others made necklaces, some drew
holy pictures. All baked Christmas cookies and put them in hand-painted
cans. They went to so much trouble, as though they were making presents
for their best friends.The Dutch family Ens put their sitio at our
disposal and we spent the whole day there with the children: my pupils,
their parents and the favela children, a total of about seventy. What
luck that we have the Ens family! The festival was very nice. At eleven
o\'clock we met at the *sitio*, decorated the *real*, planted evergreen
trees and played. My pupils had prepared some games such as
sack-hopping, etc, with prizes. The ice was soon broken. The parents
admired how Zéca and Cido played with the children.

Then came food, very important. We placed the meal on a huge table under
a tree. But - a tropical rainstorm poured down and we all crowded into
the house with our plates. At about five o\'clock we got the theatre
ready. The parents sat on chairs and tree-stumps as Cido emerged with
the children from the dark. You could see their faces lit up by candles
and torches. The crib scene also had a beautiful effect in this natural
setting under the stars.

Just before the festival the class outing had taken place: a week in the
Itatiai mountains. I trained the children in my travel style: a lot of
walking and simple fare. They accepted it all with good grace and are of
the opinion that our outings are the best in the school. When the other
classes rode up behind us and had caviar for lunch, they found it out of
place and unworthy of a class outing.

24 March 1975

I would like to disappear, be free, wander in nature, sun, wind as in
student days - the beach, waves, water, music, dancing, have a person
who listens when I try to bear the problems of others. Where has my
enthusiasm gone? I have the feeling that I am not giving the children in
the school and at home what they need. My classes seem dry, without
fire.

I have tied myself down too much, contrary to my need to be independent.
But if you\'re always only independent, \"free\", at the end you become
a tramp. Somehow everything has its time: the time for unattached
wandering in the world and the time for commitment in order to
accomplish something, and that involves restrictions and sacrificing
certain things. But all that doesn\'t help: you have to commit yourself
totally to the children as though they were your own, never only
halfway.

May 1975

The family is growing: another child, Elizete, eleven years old. Her
father disappeared years ago and left huge debts that her mother must
pay off with great difficulty, so she couldn\'t afford to send her
children to school any more. The solution? Dona Ute. I somehow managed
to get a place for her in the Waldorf School, where the class is very
full. Then Ruben\'s sister, Marcia, came. She\'s six years old and goes
to the kindergarten.

We are quite conspicuous. Recently seven of us went to the dentist, and
we filled up the waiting room. Five of us to the photographers and there
was no room left for anyone else in the little shop. (\"Are they all
yours?\"). Last week six of us at the doctor\'s (\"Are you in charge of
an orphanage?\") We all took out our knitting and sewing needles in the
waiting room and went to work (we had calculated a three-hour wait).
Delighted cries ensued: \"*Que bonitinho!\" \"Que maravilha!\"*

Finally we were able to see the doctor. Basically they are all healthy,
only Elizete has anemia. At the end the doctor said he had never seen
such well behaved children. They really are very nice among themselves
and some families even compete to invite them as playmates for their own
children.

The two older children, Maristela and Elizete, and very independent by
Brazilian standards, travel alone by bus, go shopping, etc., which is a
sensation here. They are also very solicitous and take good care of the
smaller ones. Elizete and Marcia are the cleverest, Maristela and Rubens
have hearts of gold, so respectful and participative, as is seldom seen
in children. Recently I came home tired from the teachers\' meeting;
they all had a peeled orange in their hands. Rubens said: \"Now we will
all give a piece of our orange to Ute\". We share everything. If one of
them has a piece of cake from school he saves it in order to share it
with the others. This is more important to me than any cleverness.

Once I came home from a rehearsal at the school. Smoke told me that the
children had been cooking. They were all in theatre costumes, Rubens as
a servant took my shoes off and put my tired feet into comfortable
slippers. Then I was led into the living-room where a throne had been
prepared; I sat on it and pillows were placed behind my back. The
performance began: dancing, flute-playing, mime. Then they gave me a
menu and finally the food. How nice!

October 1975

Outside someone was clapping. In Brazil, especially in the country, this
is the way you announce yourself. I went to the gate. They were children
from the favela. \"Do you have something for us, dry bread or anything
else?\"

They go clapping from house to house and beg for something to eat. I
gave them something, talked with them a while and asked where they
lived. \"Come visit us, we don\'t live far from here, in the favela
Monte Azul.\"

One day I went with them to their huts. What miserable lives they lead
in these drafty wooden huts perched on muddy slopes. Children, children
and more children, but all friendly. They hang around, not knowing how
to play. The girls are tied to the household \-- washing clothes,
fetching water, caring for the younger ones, etc. The boys are much
freer, they play football or ride around in busses or go to the
super-market to beg or guard cars. In reality these children have no
childhood; they are miniature adults.

What to do?

I was reminded of an idea I had two years ago as I wrote my pupils\'
report cards. I saw Helmut before me, Gisela, Carla and many others. I
considered: What could help Gisela to become self-aware? She would
need the feeling that she also had something to give by using her
handicraft abilities. To write reports on Carla became boring with the
years because she was perfect in everything. What was she lacking? To
open out to her fellow-human beings. And Helmut? He was too occupied
with himself, thinking that only he had suffered in life. And so the
idea developed in me that it would be beneficial for many pupils if
they could teach something to other children who had not had the same
opportunities that they had had.

But at that time the pupils were in the fifth grade, still too young.
And I didn\'t know any favela children. But now I might risk trying to
interest them in the idea. One morning, somewhat timidly, I proposed to
them my idea for an *escolinha* (little school) for favela children. A
rush of enthusiasm. They all had ideas: I can teach the children
gymnastics, I knitting, I handicrafts, I can play with them. We\'ll
collect clothing, crayons, old cloth, drawing paper. Yes, and where will
all this take place?

In my house, we can use the old shed in the yard. So it began.

Advent 1975

Christmas is almost upon us. I just finished wrapping the thirty
presents for Christmas Eve. Marcia wished for a sleeping bag for her
dwarf, which I crocheted for her. Then a hammock for the smallest doll
and various things for the crib, which \"disappeared\" a couple of weeks
ago and will re-appear embellished on Christmas Eve.

Yesterday was the last day of school. I will be happy if I see two good
reports. Next year there will be four, as Maricela will go into first
grade, Rubens in the second, Elizete and Maristela in the fifth.
Therefore Maristela is the academically farthest advanced in their
family, after Zéca. The fourth grade was the highest for the others,
while some didn\'t go to school at all. She is as simple as always
though, and doesn\'t try to lord it over her sisters and brothers.

Rubens goes to school with an enthusiasm that delights his teachers. He
is continually collecting stones or flowers, wrapping them as though
they were the greatest treasures in the world, and giving them to the
teachers. This regard for things and people, which is in him, is
something very special.

December 1975

Here life goes on as usual - fun, anger, celebrations, fighting the
cockroaches, overflowing wash-baskets and ever more people who live,
learn and work here.

You wanted a list of them. Here it is.

Williams, from Bolivia, 29, learning to be a waiter
Renato, from Chile, 26, learning to be a cook
Mario, from the Ukraine, 23, learning to be a waiter
Cido, from Paraná, 23, learning to be a cook
Odair, from Paraná, 20, learning to be a cook
Maria jose, from Paraná, 19, learning to be a nurse
Joao, from Paraná, 19, learning to be a waiter
Eliza, from Paraná, 14, learning to be a seamstress
Maristela. from Paraná, 12, Waldorf School
Elizete, from Paraná, 12, Waldorf School
Rubens, from Paraná, 7, Waldorf School
Marcia, from Paraná, 6, Waldorf Kindergarten
        
So we are fourteen altogether.

Zéca and Williams have just returned from Bolivia where Zéca traveled
around for three months with our Bolivian and could satisfy to some
extent his permanent thirst for travel. At dawn I heard voices outside
my window. First Zéca marched in dressed in a poncho, then Williams and
behind him a third one \-- a Chilean, Renato. They met during the
days-long train ride from Bolivia and, as they had only ten cruzeiros
between them, they decided never to part. Thus he became the fourteenth
inhabitant of the house and sleeps, in want of a better place, on a
borrowed ping-pong table in the so-called *palacio*, the lumber-room
that we had cleared for Williams, painted and put in an electric light.
After only a week in Brazil this lucky chap already had a place to
sleep, study and work. Zéca was able to get him admitted to the hotel
school. When Renato gets up in the morning he must role his mattress up
on a ball and cover it with a cloth, because in the afternoon twelve
favela children stream into the same room. Twice a week pupils from the
Waldorf School come and teach five to twelve year old children from the
favela. They paint, sew, knit, play theatre, work with clay, garden,
etc.

The pupils are thrilled. I went with a pupil to the favela recently.
She brought baby clothes, milk and diapers with her and put on the
diapers like an experienced mother. The children act much more
naturally when they are in contact with the favela people.

Link to:

**The Development of a Development Worker (with same image)**

I would like to describe how my idea of development aid, which led me to
work for the German Development Service, was transformed through
practice and finally gave rise to the following questions:

Is development aid meaningful in its present form?

Do we have any right to engage in the third world development process
and these people\'s lives?

During the GDS training cycle, we were faced with the question: Why did
you join the GDS? First there were the personal reasons: to get to know
people from different social origins and with different cultural
backgrounds; to master difficult situations with simple means and, well,
desire for adventure. Alongside these personal motives are the more
altruistic ones, which, however, are also egoistic in that they
influence one\'s own personal development through the positive effect on
others: to alleviate misery through the simple desire to help and from a
certain shame at being well-fed whereas others go hungry. Behind this is
a more or less clear picture of a world divided between rich and poor.
Expressions like population explosion, hunger, educational deficiency,
arise and finally culminate in the idea that only the industrially
developed countries can bring about an improvement in the lives of
two-thirds of humanity through capital investment (building up the
infrastructure, industrialization), personal aid (sending experts etc.)
and improving commercial relations (higher prices for raw material).

Armed with this knowledge, I enlisted in the GDS and was sent to Brazil
a few months later where, aside from kindergarten work in a favela, I
occupied myself trying to get boys and girls away from the deadening
effects of hanging about the streets by giving them worthwhile tasks.
Handicrafts, theater, sports, folk-dancing, sales of their work in the
wealthy part of the city, were able to give many children the feeling
that they could accomplish something through their own efforts.

When you see someone who needs help, you jump in and help him without
considering whether the help will have a lasting effect. This is what I
did in the first months of my development aid work. But after a while
you lift your head up from the daily details, look around and then
adjust your contribution to development aid and the social conditions
that made this help seem necessary, according to a broader view of the
economic, social and cultural conditions of the country. You feel out of
place in the presence of rich coffee plantations, modern skyscrapers and
fully stocked, elegant shops. Is it really necessary that we come from
Germany as volunteer development workers to a country that has so many
people living in abundance? This caused the first crack in my faith in
the value of development aid.

Nevertheless, I still saw the value of working in a favela and directly
helping the poor as far as possible - working with children, collecting
old clothes, obtaining American powdered milk for mothers with small
children, etc.

But I gradually realized that development aid, even when it actually
reaches the poor, can be dangerous. The poor accustom themselves to
receiving without contributing anything: when they\'re sick, and if
they\'re lucky, they are given medicine; when they\'re cold they are
given, God willing, clothing; if a child is under-nourished the mother
is given powdered milk, if she\'s lucky.

These two criteria - first: you get something without doing anything;
second: only when chance wills it to be so, strengthen the passive \"as
God wills\" attitude of the poor, which doesn\'t allow them to become
active in determining their own destiny. It is the receptive, waiting
attitude of a person who expects the good as well as the negative
influences on his life to come from without, and not from inside
himself. The wealthy corrupt the poor with their gifts and purely
material help. Characteristics which are, in themselves, positive, such
as cheerfulness despite poverty and little envy of the wealthy, are
fatal in their effects. They coincide with the generosity of some of the
wealthy, awake feelings of thankfulness in the poor and assuage the
consciences of the rich, despite their privileges, which are obstacles
to a just social order.

Through observing my social environment and the effect of development
aid on the character of its recipients, I came to plant the question: Is
it right to aspire to an evolutionary model for under-developed
countries based on western standards, which, in the best of cases, can
result in an improvement of living standards, but leaves the political
and social structures unchanged? Or is it preferable to dispense with
the immediate improvement of living conditions and substitute a
revolution from below which would eliminate the present social forms and
replace them with a new democratic social order?

What role can a development worker play under these conditions? Probably
only in the field of education; all other forms of development aid are
harmful to the recipients if they don\'t stimulate them to act on their
own. Education in the sense of imparting information on a wide basis:
get the children off the streets and into primary and trade schools. It
must be kept in mind, however, that mechanical learning through
memorizing can suffocate the natural desire to learn which is innate in
every child, and that thinking and the critical observation of the
environment should be promoted. Education also in the sense of
consciousness-building: make clear to the oppressed how their favela
existence is the inevitable result of the overall structure of the
country. Education, furthermore, in the general human sense: restores a
spiritual center to their lives.

The problem of a rich upper-class and poor land and slum dwellers is not
only a problem of well-being. Material misery and nutritional deficiency
are merely the most extreme forms of a gulf which goes much deeper. When
Che Guevara said, \"It\'s not a matter of how much meat one eats or how
often one can go to the beach. It\'s a matter of the individual feeling
richer and much more responsible *within.\"*

I think he analyzed the problem on a much higher level than most
official representatives of development aid. They take the position
that poverty can only be eliminated if you give the poor something to
eat. But the problem is also to change the fact that the lower classes
are objects to those who govern and to allow them to participate in
the decisions and the life of the country. Furthermore, their
traditional world-conception, which corresponded to their way of life
and supported them spiritually, having been torn away, it must be made
possible for them to create an inner world which corresponds to an
industrialized, technical society. All this will not be accomplished
by giving the poor more to eat. Their need is not only physical, but
also spiritual.

Poverty has always existed. But hunger, poverty and misery in a jungle
village, where the people are supported by a spiritual background, is
different from hunger, poverty and misery in a favela. The stomachs
growl in both cases. But the spiritual situation of a black in a jungle
village is different from that of a black in a favela. Together with
civilization, cinema, TV, assembly-lines, the crowds and hectic activity
of big cities \-- this technical world into which they have been thrown
without being able to enjoy its amenities \-- their spiritual world has
been taken from them, the myths and fairy tales, the beliefs, the
instinct for correct nutrition, appropriate ways of raising children,
medicinal plants. Substitutes have hardly been provided; efforts to
eliminate illiteracy have a practical value, but do not create a new
world of ideas. The devastating effects of the stolid learning of the
ABCs, the memorizing of historical dates and Geography concepts in
school can be best seen in the favela people. They are complete
materialists. Their efforts, as soon as they have overcome the most
basic misery, are directed towards obtaining civilization\'s material
goods such as radio, TV, etc. For me development aid is real help only
when it is oriented towards the *human being*. Here is an example from
our favela.

It makes no sense to build playgrounds or public laundries if there is
no group of people to teach the children, the mothers and, when
possible, the fathers, to actively adapt themselves to life, to
consciously absorb the phenomena of the environment together with all
its injustice, and implant in them a new spiritual hunger. This can be
done through practical work, for example, the building of a youth center
with the children in which handicrafts, theater and stories in which the
world outside the favela is brought into view are undertaken; and always
done in a way that enables the children to be introspectively active and
carry responsibility themselves, and are confident that in *every* case
one is responsive to them, even if it means running the risk of failure.
Alongside the external arrangements (for example handicrafts which could
be sold to help finance the youth center) the feeling must exist that
something has been done through their own efforts. Will-power must be
cultivated and a seed planted which can grow into the attitude that
one\'s life can be changed through personal efforts and is not dependent
on a destiny uninfluenced by personal acts.

There could be regular meeting with the adults about how to make the
favela more worthy of its human inhabitants. Specific problems must be
addressed which are tackled by knowledgeable work-groups. There are
enough problems and questions to be dealt with: obtaining water, garbage
disposal, additional earnings through work at home, regular school
attendance for children, etc. The desire for improvement must come from
within \-- it makes no sense, for example, to build a laundry when the
favela people never desired one. During regular meetings, however, the
wish for one could arise from within and then be realized. In
approaching common problems in this way, the awareness would gradually
arise that one is not alone with his problems, but that thousands are in
the same situation. Democracy in miniature could be practiced. The
favelados would be treated a *human beings*, as acting, feeling,
thinking human beings \-- and not as objects.

A social worker can act as a catalyst. Not as leader, for that would be
tutelage under another name, but as a person who gives impulses but
doesn\'t do what the other can do: partly stimulating, partly meeting
them half-way.

To be continued

Translated from the German by Frank Thomas Smith.

This great book is available for purchase at [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Favela-children-Brazilian-Ute-Craemer/dp/194830242X) in paperback and kindle.

Also at [Barnes and Noble](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/favela-children-ute-craemer/1141416925?ean=9781948302425)
