# Anthroposophical Guidelines

![](guidelines.jpg){class="a"}

## Rudolf Steiner

## Numbers 38 to 63

38\. If one has been able to contemplate man in his *image-nature *and
in his revealed spirituality in accordance with the indications given in
the previous Guidelines, one stands in the spiritual world where one
sees man as an active spiritual being, and also sees the psychic-moral
laws in their reality. For the moral world-order appears now as the
earthly likeness of an order belonging to the spiritual world. And the
physical and moral world-orders bond themselves in unity.

39\. The *will* comes from within man. It is completely foreign to the
natural laws gained from the outer world. The sense organs' similarity
to external natural objects is discernible. The will can not yet
manifest itself in their activities. The essence which is revealed in
the rhythmic system is less similar to everything external. The will can
intervene in this system to a certain extent. But this system is still
involved with becoming and dying. The will is still bound by this.

40\. The nature of the metabolism and limbs system manifests itself
through matter and their processes, but the matter and the processes
have nothing more to do with it than the painter and his tools have to
do with the finished picture. The will can therefore directly intervene.
If one grasps the spiritual human being behind the one who lives and
acts according to natural laws, one finds in *him* a field in which one
can become aware of the will's working. Conversely, in the field of the
senses will remains a meaningless word; and whoever seeks to understand
it in this field fails to recognize the true nature of the will and
replaces it with something else.

41\. In the previous Guideline the nature of the *human will* was
described. Only by becoming aware of this nature is one in a cosmic
sphere in which destiny (karma) works. As long as one only sees the laws
which dominate in connection with natural things and natural facts, he
remains far from the laws which apply to destiny.

42\. By grasping the laws of destiny in this way, it is also apparent
that this destiny cannot be realized through a single physical earthly
life. As long as man lives in the same physical body, he can only carry
out the moral content of his will to the extent the physical body within
the physical world allows. Only when he passes through the gates of
death into the spiritual world is the spiritual nature of the will able
to achieve its true effect. There the good and the bad will achieve
spiritual fulfillment in their corresponding results for the first time.

43\. By means of this spiritual fulfillment, man configures himself
between death and a new birth; in his *essence* he becomes an image of
what he *did* during his life on earth. Through this, his essence, he
configures his physical life upon his return to earth. The spiritual,
which affects destiny, can only carry out its task in the physical when
its corresponding causation has *previously* withdrawn into the
spiritual world. For what is experienced in life as destiny is not built
upon the results of physical occurrences, but proceeds from the
spiritual.

44\. A transition to the spiritual-scientific consideration of the
question of destiny should be made using examples from the life of
individual persons: how the path of destiny affected the course of his
life. For example, how a youthful experience, surely not carried out in
full freedom by the person involved, can influence his entire later
life.

45\. The meaning of the fact that during the course of physical life
between birth and death the good can seem unhappy and evil at least
apparently happy, should be depicted. Examples in pictures are more
important in discussing these things than theoretical explanations,
because they better prepare for spiritual scientific considerations.

46\. In cases of destiny which occur in a person's life in a way that
cannot be explained by his particular present earth-life, it should be
shown that such occurrences quite obviously point directly to previous
lives. It should of course be clear that in expounding such things
nothing obligatory is meant; rather that something is said which orients
thinking towards spiritual-scientific considerations of the question of
destiny.

47\. Only the smallest part of the formation of man's destiny enters
into ordinary consciousness; it works mostly in the unconscious. But it
is just by the unveiling of the threads of destiny that it becomes clear
how unconscious content can become conscious. Those who claim that the
temporarily unconscious must remain in the area of the unknown, and
create therewith a limit to knowledge, are completely mistaken. For
every element of his destiny that a person unveils, he lifts a
previously unconscious content into the realm of consciousness.

48\. By such unveiling, one becomes aware that destiny is not arranged
during life between birth and death; rather is one impelled, just by
this question of destiny, to think about the life between death and a
new birth.

49\. By directing the consideration of human experience beyond one's
self and towards the question of destiny, one achieves a true feeling
for the relationship between the material and the spiritual worlds. By
observing destiny's interplay, one is already standing in the spiritual
world. For the interconnections of destiny are not at all related to
materiality.

50\. It is extremely important to point out how the consideration of the
history of humanity is vitalized when one shows that by passing from
epoch to epoch in their repeated earth lives, it is the human souls
themselves which carry over the results of one historical epoch into the
other.

51\. One may easily object that viewing history in this way takes from
it its elementary and na√Øve elements. But this is unjust. On the
contrary, it deepens the view of history because it follows it within
man's innermost being. History thus becomes richer and more concrete,
not poorer and more abstract. In the depiction one must only develop
heart and appreciation for the living human soul, into which one thereby
achieves profound insight.

52\. The epochs in life between death and a new life should be
considered in relation to the forming of karma. The "how" of this
consideration shall be the subject of the following guidelines.

53\. The unfolding of human life between death and a new birth occurs in
successive stages. During several days after passing through the portals
of death, the forgoing life is perceived in *images. *At the same time,
this perception shows the detachment of the bearer \[physical body\] of
this life from the human psychic-spiritual being.

54\. In the time which comprises approximately one-third of the forgoing
earthly life, the soul experiences the effect that life must have in the
sense of an ethically just world order. During this experience, the
intention is born to form the next earthly life as compensation for the
forgoing one.

55\. A purely spiritual, long enduring epoch follows, during which the
human soul prepares its coming earth-life in the sense of karma,
together with other karmically conjoined human souls and with beings of
the higher hierarchies.

56\. The epoch between death and a new birth, during which the person's
karma is prepared, can only be described based of the results of
spiritual research. But it must always be borne in mind that reason is
enlightened by this description. Reason only needs to objectively
consider the essence of the reality of sense perception to realize that
it also points to the spiritual, as a cadaver's form points to the life
\[once\] inherent in it.

57\. The results of spiritual science show that between death and birth
man belongs to spiritual realms, just as he belongs to the three realms
of nature -- mineral, vegetable and animal -- between birth and death.

58\. The mineral kingdom is recognizable in the present form of the
human being; the vegetable--etheric body--is the foundation of his
becoming and growing; the animal--astral body--the impulse for the
unfolding of his feeling and will. The crowning of conscious feeling and
will in the *self-conscious *spirit immediately makes the relation of
man to the spiritual world apparent.

59\. An objective consideration of thinking shows that normal
consciousness's thoughts have no existence of their own, that they only
appear as mirror-images of something. But the individual feels himself
*alive* in thoughts. The *thoughts* do not live; rather *he* lives *in*
the thoughts. This \[thought\] life originates in the spiritual beings
of the third hierarchy, a spiritual realm (in the sense of my *Outline
of Esoteric Science*).

60\. Extending this objective consideration to feelings shows that
although they arise from the physical organism, they cannot originate
there, and that their life includes an essence which is independent of
the physical organism. Man can feel himself to be in the natural world
with his physical organism. But it is just then, when he does this with
self-knowledge, that he experiences himself to be in a spiritual realm
through his feelings. It is the realm of the second hierarchy.

61\. As a being of will, man does not turn to his physical organism, but
to the outer world. He doesn't ask when he wants to walk: "What do I
feel in my feet? but what is out there as a goal I want to reach." He
forgets his organism when he wills. In his will he doesn't belong to
*his* nature. He belongs to the spirit-realm of the first hierarchy.

To be continued

[Numbers 29 - 37 plus](https://southerncrossreview.org/158/guidelines-29-37-plus.html)
