![](/goya-letters.jpg)

# Letters to the Editor

RE: [Breathe](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html) by Becky Hemsley

I have felt this way all my life. I sobbed after reading this poem - and
she smiled, feeling vindicated\... 

Chonny A.

RE: [The Candidate from Hell](https://southerncrossreview.org/159/engelhardt-trump-from-hell.html) by Tom Engelhardt

Quite disappointed to have you take an overtly political fear-mongering
stance. If it was more truthful, you\'d also have included Kamala as the
other candidate from hell. I\'m no republican and certainly no democrat,
but there is truth about the scam labeled as \"green\". taxes taxes
taxes. marketing. green washing. Humans are out of their depths thinking
\"green\" will help the planet. What will help the planet is love,
reverence for one another, and knowing the American political show is a
great illusion. Breaking down of giant corporations, holding corporate
entities accountable to the major harm that *they* cause the planet. it
is a lack of corporate responsibility, these businesses tricking the
individual that it is *their* fault, that only if each individual would
recycle and compost, we could reverse \"climate change\". All the while
corporations get away with oil spills, get bailed out by taxpayer\'s
dollars, continuing to wrap their products in oil. Trump is a symptom,
not a cause of the illness of the world. Kamala is a fool who will be
paid to do the biddings of the NWO.

both represent the dissillusions of the american people, both represent
the lack of intelligence, lask of heart, and humanity\'s fall in
relationship with God.

i will be unsubscribing and wish you had taken a more nuanced position.

May god save us all,

Jenny

RE: [Characteristics of Judaism and Zionism](https://southerncrossreview.org/76/steiner-judaism.html) by Rudolf Ssteiner

O ye gods!

Thank you for distributing this lecture. Can you tell us the audience,
date and location of this lecture?

As a Jewish person (and something of a Jewish Mystic at 8 years old), a
50 year student of Anthroposophy with 16 years of Waldorf Class
Teaching, married and participating in the Christian Community, I can
concur with much of what Steiner puts forth. Yes, the 10 commandments
were very clear that the people of the covenant were prohibited to make
images of God (or people). But Steiner misses a cardinal piece of the
story. As you know well, not only did the Rabbi's work to preserve the
covenant of the Jewish relationship to Yahweh through the Torah, Talmud
and Mishnah and even the Kabbalah, but the Christian world persecuted
and separated the Jewish people from the rest of the Christian World and
prevented us from assimilating into the fullness of humanity. (See the
book: The Sword of Constantine by the former priest, James Carroll). And
the Holocaust is a primary example of the prevention of those of Jewish
extraction to assimilate and even adopt Christianity. And of course
Steiner was wrong about the principal of universal humanity (as evidence
by German (especially) racism. The Jewish people never lost their
connection to Israel - "Next year in Jerusalem." And after the barbarous
murder of 6 million Jewish people, no country wanted the survivors.
Zionism grew as a force that grew out of the soil of Christian hatred
and murderousness and the conviction that the Jewish people killed
Christ, did it not? Seems to me that Steiner was blind to the realities
that the Jewish people faced. And for those Jews who followed Steiner's
conviction that the Jewish people remain in Germany, it was the ovens
that awaited them.

And who were the first Christians but those Jewish people who recognized
Christ.

I know this is a complicated story, but Steiner, it seems to me, saw one
piece of that story and was blind to the overwhelming history that kept
the Jewish people as victims of Christian hatred.

I would also note that although the Jewish people were artists in the
field of music and less inclined and talented in the visual arts there
were notable exceptions, amongst whom were:

Marc Chagall, Daniel Moritz Oppenheim, Camille Pissaro, Max Weber, Boris
Schatz established the Bezalel School, an institute to train painters
and sculptors in fine art techniques, Nahum Gutman, Judy Chicago, Malcah
Zeldis, Ahron ben Shmuel, Jacques Lipchitz, Camille Pissarro    

And a number of notable women artists as well.

It should be said that many of these were impressionistic or
expressionistic abstract artists, no doubt influenced by the prohibition
against creating images of human or divine beings. And what about
Islam's prohibition against representing human or divine images.

I know this is a little rambling, but as a Jewish person I admit I am
sensitive to portrayal of the Jewish people as backward remnants of a
people once relevant but no longer.

Thank you again for this lecture, and I look forward to your own
thoughts.

An appreciative reader of the Southern Cross Review.

Jeff Kofsky

RE: [Exile\'s End - a Memoir](https://www.amazon.com/Exiles-End-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/1948302616)

Hola Frank, disfrute mucho de leer "Exile's End", muy interesante,
muchas gracias por compartirla!\
un abrazo

Celina MacKern

RE: [The Other Me](https://southerncrossreview.org/159/fts-other-me.html)

Hermoso cuento. No entiendo cómo no te han dado el Nobel de literatura.
Quizás se lo dieron a tu otro yo en un universo paralelo.

Hernán Melana
