# The Magic Mound - Chapter 16

![](magic-mound-cover.png){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 16

### The White Stone

Food was no problem in Maxalabora. One of the boys had only to stand on
Platero\'s back and reach up to pluck tropical fruit from the trees. The
was also a grape-like berry that grew on silver-colored bushes. They
liked these best because of their exquisite sweetness. Even Platero ate
them from Divines hand. Sergio said he had never heard of a donkey
eating grapes before and Divino replied that no one had ever heard of a
donkey that flew over chasms either. They agreed that Platero was an
extraordinary donkey.

There was still no proper path to follow, so they continued heading
south hoping for some clue to indicate where they should go. They were
especially attentive to their surroundings at sunset, for they
remembered how the raven\'s verse continued:

*When the setting sun you spy\
Mark where the arc is high,\
Go to where the star is nigh...*

The first evening at sunset they saw nothing like an arc. The second
night was no different. Divino mentioned Tamoshot several times, hoping
he would appear unexpectedly as he had before. But Tamoshot did not come
to show them the way. On the third day it rained. No water could get
through their tararobes, but the ground became soggy and the going was
more difficult. A thick fog descended over the forest and it got dark
early because of the fog and rain. They were lucky to find a relatively
comfortable place to spend the night between the exposed roots of a huge
tree. Just as they were settling down to a miserable night the rain
stopped and a wind rose that blew away the fog. They saw the sun set in
the west. Then:

\"Look, Sergio!\" In the southwest a rainbow sparkled like a necklace on
the sky\'s throat. They jumped up and stared, stunned by its beauty.

\"The arc, Divino, it\'s the arc,\" Sergio exclaimed. *When the setting
sun you spy* - there, we spied it.\" He pointed to the place where the
sun was sinking below the forest. \"*Mark where the* *arc* - the
rainbow - *is high*. The rainbow\'s highest point is its center, so if
we look down from there. Look, the star!\"

Divino followed his brother\'s finger and, sure enough, he saw a star
twinkling in the half-circle formed by the rainbow.

*Go to where the star is nigh* he murmured. \"What does *nigh* mean,
Sergio?\"

\"Near.\"

\"But how can we get near to a star?\"

Sergio crept along the heavy roots of the tree they were under until he
came to its trunk. He jumped up to the lowest branch and swung himself
up. From there it was not difficult to climb from limb to limb until he
was high enough to see over the forest, for that tree was the tallest of
them all. He peered at the fading rainbow and the star.

\"What do you see?\" Divino called.

\"I know now where we have to go,\" Sergio answered. \"It\'s so
beautiful up here that I could stay all night.\"

Divino would have liked to climb up too, but he knew that he couldn\'t
reach the tree\'s lowest branch, so he waited with Platero until Sergio
came down. It was dark when he did. He smiled and dropped down onto a
thick root next to Divino.

\"Under the star is a hill and on the hill is something that looks like
a white stone.\"

\"A white stone?\"

\"Don\'t you see? The star is nigh to that white stone, at least it
appears to be. In reality it\'s millions of light-years away.\"

Divino believed his brother more than he understood him. He nodded.

\"That\'s where we must go,\" Sergio said.

\"Where?\"

\"To the white stone.\"

The next day was clear and shining and raindrops still dripped from the
leaves above them. After walking about an hour Sergio decided to climb a
tree in order to get a bearing on the white stone. This time he chose a
tree without thick exposed roots so Divino could stand on Platero\'s
back and climb up behind him. The tree was not as tall as the first one,
but it was tall enough for them to see the hill. They went as high as
they could, but did not see the white stone. Divino said it might only
be visible at night. Sergio was doubtful. There was no moon and the star
was too far away to shed much light on the stone.

They climbed down and continued in what Sergio thought was the general
direction of the hill. When night fell and the star appeared again, this
time without the rainbow, they climbed a tall tree. From its top they
saw the white stone glowing in the dark. It was still far away but
closer than the night before. They took its bearing mentally and retired
for the night.

In this way they went through the forest for two more days, correcting
their course by taking bearings on the white stone at night. On the
third day, while it was still light, they reached the hill, the only one
for miles around. There were many gray stones on the hill and they all
looked alike except for size. Divino suggested that they wait for
nightfall and see which stone receives the star\'s light and turns
white. Sergio explained that the star would shine on all the stones
equally, but he saw no alternative, so they made themselves comfortable
on the hill and waited.

At twilight the star appeared in the east. The sat watching it for hours
as it rose in the sky. \"Look, Sergio,\" Divino whispered, pointing to
their right. Sergio looked and saw a large stone take on an eerie glow.
They ran over to it while Platero stood where he was grazing. Markings
in the stones became clearer as the star approached mid-sky directly
over them. Then they saw that they were letters. Sergio wanted to copy
them because he feared they might disappear once the star passed. But he
had nothing to write with.

\"Tamoshot wrote on the ground,\" Divino said.

Sergio picked up a stick lying nearby and carefully scratched the
letters in the earth. What he wrote looked like this:

TEL HET FOREBE U YPAL\
LITUN HET TIGHN IS ENOD\
OT TURNER LESTEC HET ESTSHORT YAW\
DRAWTOS HET SIRING NUS

While Sergio was copying the letters, Divino sat in front of the white
stone gazing at the glowing letters. When Sergio finished he saw that
Divino\'s head was on his chest and he had fallen asleep. Sergio smiled
affectionately and eased his brother into a more comfortable sleeping
position on the ground. It had been a long day and Sergio was also
feeling sleepy. He suspected it had something to do with the glowing
stone. Finally he decided to lie down before he fell down and was
immediately asleep. Platero was the only one of the three still awake.
He continued eating until he was satisfied and finally slept without the
help of the white stone, which he had barely noticed.

In the morning the song birds woke the boys and the donkey at the same
time. \"I dreamed about the white stone,\" Divino said, rubbing the
sleep from his eyes. Sergio waited expectantly, knowing that his brother
often had meaningful dreams. \"The stone was all lit up and the letters
were blinking on and off in red and yellow,\" Divino said, trying hard
to remember his dream. \"Tamoshot was here writing on the ground.\" He
went to the place where Sergio had scratched the stone\'s markings.
\"You were right, Sergio. Look, the letters have disappeared from the
stone.

Sergio nodded, he had already noticed that. He was waiting for Divino to
continue describing his dream. \"While the letters were blinking on and
off this word\" - he pointed to HET in the first line, then to the same
word in the third line - \"wasn\'t HET, but 231.\"

\"That\'s all?\" Sergio asked.

\"I think so, that\'s all I can remember anyway.\"

Sergio knelt down in front of the letters he had scratched on the ground
the night before.

\"What does it mean, Sergio?\" Although Divino had the dreams, it was
Sergio who could interpret them. He wrote 321 over the letters HET in
each of the three lines where they appeared. He knit his brow: \"It H is
2 and E is 3 and T is 1, we should write the word like this. He rubbed
out 321 and put THE in its place.

\"That\'s a real word, Sergio.\"

\"Yes, the letters seem to be all mixed up. Was that the only word that
flashed numbers in the dream? Divino confirmed that it was so Sergio
began to play with the letters in each grouping, trying to make sense
out of them.

\"TEL could be LET, which could mean LET THE\...RATS\...BEFORE\...YOU
PLAY.\" It didn\'t take him long to solve the cryptogram:

LET THE RATS BEFORE YOU PLAY\
UNTIL THE NIGHT IS DONE\
TO RETURN SELECT THE SHORTEST WAY\
TOWARDS THE RISING SUN

The word TOWARDS gave him the most trouble, but when he finished he sat
back quite pleased with himself. He read it to Divino.

\"What rats?\" Divino wanted to know.

\"I don\'t know. We\'ll just have to keep our eyes open for them.\"

\"I don\'t like rats.\"

\"Neither do I, but that\'s what it says.\"

Divino wasn\'t very good at deciphering cryptograms. Nevertheless, he
studied the words scratched in the ground until his head hurt. Finally
he smiled, wet his finger as he had often seen Dona Ute do when she was
turning pages and wrote, not scratched but wrote in a thin layer of
dust: S T A R, which is RATS in reverse.

Sergio stared. \"Of course, STAR, you\'re right, Divino. LET THE *STAR*
BEFORE YOU PLAY.\" He patted Divino on the back, which pleased him very
much as he didn\'t often receive praise from Sergio. \"What does it
mean?\" he asked.

\"That we should keep following the star at night.\"

\"Can\'t we walk during the day and check at night?\"

\"I don\'t think so. The instructions are clear and we should follow
them.\"

Divino didn\'t see why, but he knew his brother was usually right, so he
nodded and said, \"How about breakfast?\"

To be continued

[Chapters 14 & 15](https://southerncrossreview.org/158/magic-mound-14-15.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle: [The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)
and in Spanish at: [La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)

