# Project 2025

![](project-2025.jpg){class="a"}

### A New Pax Romana

## By [Liz Theoharis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/) and [Shailly Gupta Barnes](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/shaillyguptabarnes/)

The Roman poet Juvenal coined the phrase "[bread and
circuses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bread_and_circuses)" nearly
2,000 years ago for the extravagant entertainment the Roman Empire used
to distract attention from imperial policies that caused widespread
discontent. Imagine the lavish banquets, gladiatorial bouts, use and
abuse of young men and women for the pleasure of the rich, and so much
more that characterized the later years of that empire. And none of it
seems that far off from the situation we, in these increasingly
dis-United States, find ourselves in today.

Although the Roman Empire described itself as being in favor of life and
peace, the various Caesars and their enablers regularly dealt death and
destruction in their wake. They spread the [*Pax
Romana*](https://www.pbs.org/empires/romans/empire/frontiers.html) (the
Roman Peace), including a taxation system that left the poor in debt
servitude, a military that caused terror and violence across the
then-known world, and a ruling authority that pitted whole communities
against each other, while legislating who could associate with whom
(passing [marriage
laws](https://www.pbs.org/empires/romans/empire/weddings.html), for
instance, that banned gay, inter-racial, or even cross-class marriages).
The emperor in power in Jesus's time, Caesar Augustus, was known for
ushering in a Golden Age of Moral Values that went hand in hand with
that *Pax Romana*, and it meant war and death, especially for the
poor.

Fast forward millennia and that world bears a strange resemblance to the
media distractions, violence, and regressive policies that MAGA and
other extremists are pushing forward in our times. Whether it's Donald
Trump's assertion that "I alone [can
fix](https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/07/trump-rnc-speech-alone-fix-it/492557/)
your problems"; Supreme Court and state legislative attacks on
[reproductive
rights](https://www.aclu.org/documents/abortion-bans-states), [same-sex
marriage,](https://www.hrc.org/press-releases/roundup-of-anti-lgbtq-legislation-advancing-in-states-across-the-country)
and [trans
youth](https://www.erikson.edu/blog/trans-youth-under-attack-in-the-u-s/)
in the name of family values; cuts to
[welfare](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/politics-news/2024-food-stamp-rent-assistance-programs-get-hit-hard-rcna130833),
[healthcare](https://www.cbpp.org/research/health/unwinding-watch-tracking-medicaid-coverage-as-pandemic-protections-end),
[worker's
rights](https://www.americanprogress.org/article/president-biden-should-veto-anti-worker-lawmakers-attack-on-union-rights/)
and other life-sustaining programs to protect corporate interests; the
militarizing of endless communities by [allowing
guns](https://supreme.justia.com/cases-by-topic/gun-rights/) (especially
AR-15 rifles) to proliferate, while offering only thoughts and prayers
to the victims of violence, the MAGA movement is promoting [culture
wars](https://thehill.com/opinion/4445662-for-maga-its-the-culture-stupid/)
and extremist policies under the banner of [Christian
nationalism](https://tomdispatch.com/liz-theoharis-fixing-our-eyes-on-american-poverty/).
In doing so, its leaders are perfecting a
[disdain](https://newlinesmag.com/argument/j-d-vance-and-the-myth-of-white-exceptionalism/)
for the excluded, exploited, and rejected that hurts the poor first and
worst, but impacts all of society.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506473644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

And now, after decades of neoliberal plunder and the coronation of an
avowed Christian nationalist --- Speaker of the House [Mike
Johnson](https://religionnews.com/2023/11/02/mike-johnsons-reading-of-scripture-misses-what-it-really-means-to-be-a-christian-nation/)
--- to the third most powerful position in the government, the Christian
Right and its wealthy patrons have their eyes set on an even more
ambitious power-grab: Project 2025. Articulated through the [Heritage
Foundation's](https://www.heritage.org/conservatism/commentary/project-2025)
2025 Presidential Transition Project, it's a sprawling plan to maximize
presidential power with hundreds of newly trained and deployed political
operatives during Donald Trump's next presidency. It was seen in full
display recently at the Republican National Convention and made all the
more likely by the recent assassination attempt against him with (yes!)
an AR-15! The nearly 900-page document outlines a plan to ramp up U.S.
military might, slash social welfare programs, and prioritize
"traditional marriage." A reflection of the Republican Party today,
including several Christian nationalist organizations and billionaire
funders listed among its 100 institutional sponsors, Project 2025 is a
roadmap for what could be thought of as a new *Pax Romana*.

**The Formal Project 2025 Takeover**

As Project 2025's [official website](https://www.project2025.org/)
explains (and doesn't this sound like it could come directly from the
mouth of vice-presidential nominee J.D. Vance?): "It is not enough for
conservatives to win elections. If we are going to rescue the country
from the grip of the radical Left, we need a governing agenda and the
right people in place, ready to carry this agenda out on Day One of the
next conservative Administration." Although its authors unabashedly
deploy the language of conservative populism --- decrying wokeness and
"cultural Marxists" --- the plan is chiefly concerned with how to put
ever greater control of both people and resources in the hands of a
small minority of mostly white, mostly male, wealthy Christians.

The wholesale capture of the state is the ultimate goal of its Christian
nationalist architects. Project 2025 simply clarifies just how they plan
to implement their drive for power. Each of its sections --- from
"taking the reins of government" by centralizing executive authority in
the office of the President to securing "the common defense" by
expanding every branch of the military --- is worth reviewing.

The longest section focuses on "general welfare" and it should be no
surprise that the Departments of Agriculture, Health and Human Services,
and Housing and Urban Development are subject to significant cutbacks,
including:

-   Imposing yet stricter eligibility standards, work requirements, and
    asset tests to constrain access to Medicaid, even though [more than
    23 million
    Americans](https://www.kff.org/report-section/medicaid-enrollment-and-unwinding-tracker-overview/#:~:text=At%20least%2023%2C785%2C000%20Medicaid%20enrollees,and%20the%20District%20of%20Columbia.)
    have been unenrolled from that program since 2023;
-   Revisiting how the "Thrifty Food Plan" is formulated to minimize
    food-stamp allocations, while imposing onerous work requirements on
    the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), even though
    [most of its recipients
    work](https://www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/most-working-age-snap-participants-work-but-often-in-unstable-jobs)
    and/or are in households with children, elderly people, or people
    with disabilities;
-   Ending universal free school meals by removing the "community
    eligibility provision," which allows school districts with high
    poverty rates to provide free breakfast and lunch programs to all
    children in need;
-   Eliminating [Head
    Start](https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/data-ongoing-monitoring/article/head-start-program-facts-fiscal-year-2022),
    which has served 39 million children and families since 1965 and
    currently serves more than 800,000 poor families with young
    children, while shuttering the Department of Education;
-   Ending "[Housing
    First](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/20/us/politics/federal-policy-on-homelessness-becomes-new-target-of-the-right.html)"
    programs and prohibiting non-citizens, including mixed-status
    families, from living in low-income public housing; and
-   Imposing a "life agenda" and a "family agenda" that will restrict
    access to abortion and reproductive rights, and otherwise curtail
    LGBTQ+ rights.

Such proposals would undoubtedly be deeply unpopular. In fact, as people
[learn
more](https://navigatorresearch.org/a-guide-for-progressives-on-how-to-brand-project-2025/)
about Project 2025, opposition is growing, even across party lines.
[Most
Americans](https://navigatorresearch.org/vast-majorities-of-americans-intensely-support-increasing-funding-for-programs/)
want a government that would provide for the down-and-out, who are a
growing segment of the population and the electorate, as well as one
that supports [abortion
rights](https://news.gallup.com/poll/506759/broader-support-abortion-rights-continues-post-dobbs.aspx),
[voting
rights](https://news.gallup.com/poll/403052/eight-americans-favor-early-voting-photo-laws.aspx),
and the [freedom of
expression](https://www.thefire.org/news/poll-69-americans-believe-country-wrong-track-free-speech).
At least [40%](https://otherwords.org/a-wake-up-call-on-poverty/) of us
--- 135-140 million people --- are either poor or one emergency away
from economic ruin, including 80 million eligible voters. Project 2025's
social welfare cuts would, in fact, push significant numbers of people
across the poverty line into financial ruin.

Even Donald Trump has tried to distance himself from Project 2025 as
attention has moved toward its distinctly (di)visionary agenda. However,
[more than
half](https://www.cnn.com/2024/07/11/politics/trump-allies-project-2025/index.html)
of the project's listed authors, editors, or contributors were once part
of his administration --- and no one doubts that his vice-presidential
nominee is 100% pro-Project 2025!

**The Informal Takeover Already Underway**

Perhaps scarier than either Trump's or Vance's connection to this
regressive plan, however, is the fact that, despite popular distaste for
such policies, it may not take a second Trump presidency to implement
significant parts of Project 2025. In this sense, it reflects the
ancient world of the *Pax Romana*. Rather than being dependent on
particular emperors, its "peace" was a political and ideological program
that punished the poor and marginalized so many, while keeping all its
subjects in line.

From its recent rulings, it's clear that the Supreme Court is hastening
Project 2025's agenda judicially, both in terms of specific future
policies and the executive power grab at the heart of that mandate (and
now of that [court's
rulings](https://www.aclu.org/press-releases/supreme-court-grants-trump-broad-immunity-for-official-acts-placing-presidents-above-the-law)).
In June, for instance, it ruled in favor of the city of [Grants Pass,
Oregon](https://www.propublica.org/article/us-supreme-court-grants-pass-homelessness#:~:text=In%20its%206%2D3%20decision,against%20cruel%20and%20unusual%20punishment.),
which enacted a law to fine, jail, and ultimately expel its unhoused
residents. That precedent will only exacerbate the already [hostile
terrain](https://homelesslaw.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/US-Joint-SR-Report.pdf)
confronting unhoused people, seeding firm ground to 2025's plan to
eliminate even more housing projects.

Worse yet, as the *Nation*'s Elie Mystal recently [made
clear](https://www.thenation.com/article/society/supreme-court-term-consequences/),
in just a few weeks of rulings, the court "legalized bribery of public
officials, declared the president of the United States absolutely immune
from criminal prosecution for 'official acts,' and made the power to
issue regulations subject to the court's unelected approval." As he
warns, "There's no legislative fix for the problems the court has
created... \[and\] they will continue to do all the things Republicans
want that nobody elected them to do."

In addition, in the legislative arena, Congressional debates around [the
Farm
Bill](https://thehill.com/business/4689837-a-fight-over-snap-funding-could-derail-the-farm-bill/)
echo Project 2025's plan to cut food assistance by limiting updates to
the Thrifty Food Plan, the current formula that determines SNAP
allocations. For example, at the state level, a [Republican
supermajority](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/politics-news/house-republicans-food-stamps-debt-ceiling-rcna81971)
in Kansas voted last year to override the governor's veto and enact work
requirements for older recipients of SNAP benefits.

Overall, various Project 2025 priorities are already being implemented
at the state and local level, with reproductive rights, [LGBTQ+
rights](https://www.aclu.org/legislative-attacks-on-lgbtq-rights-2024),
public education, social welfare programs, and unhoused people under
serious threat in Republican-run states across the country. Since the
Supreme Court decision in 2022 to [overturn *Roe v.
Wade*](https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/21pdf/19-1392_6j37.pdf),
21 states have enacted [full or partial
bans](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2024/us/abortion-laws-roe-v-wade.html)
on abortion. Meanwhile, far-right groups like [Moms of
Liberty](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/jul/06/moms-for-liberty-long-history-rightwing-activism)
are seeking to capture local school boards as part of a "war on
wokeness."

There is also a multi-state strategy underway to preempt community-led
efforts to implement guaranteed income programs. At least [10
states](https://www.urban.org/urban-wire/banning-guaranteed-income-programs-undermines-american-values)
have challenged [basic income
programs](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/60ae8e339f75051fd95f792e/t/65d3f264d2a6c70038ca259d/1708388968295/LRP+MGI+national+Survey+Memo+1.5.2024+(2).pdf)
with legislative bans, funding restrictions, constitutional challenges,
and court injunctions, while [four Republican-led
states](https://www.npr.org/2024/05/03/1248663386/basic-income-ban-poverty-cash-aid-states)
--- Arkansas, Idaho, Iowa, and South Dakota --- have already completely
prohibited such programs.  

And in lockstep with Project 2025's call for military expansion,
Mississippi Senator [Roger
Wicker](https://www.forbes.com/sites/williamhartung/2024/05/30/wickers-pentagon-spending-plan-doubles-down-on-a-failedl-strategy/?sh=594d52535805)
recently released [a
report](https://www.wicker.senate.gov/services/files/BC957888-0A93-432F-A49E-6202768A9CE0)
proposing that \$55 billion be added to the Pentagon's already humongous
budget in fiscal year 2025 while raising military spending by hundreds
of billions of dollars in the next five to seven years. The report,
"Peace Through Strength," revives the false idea that spending ever more
on war preparations makes us safer. Not only is Wicker distorting [Cold
War
history](https://www.forbes.com/sites/williamhartung/2024/05/30/wickers-pentagon-spending-plan-doubles-down-on-a-failedl-strategy/),
but his prescriptions ignore our experience of the past 20 years of
military buildup and the disastrous Global War on Terror. According to
[the Costs of War Project](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/) and the
[National Priorities Project](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/), this
country's post-9/11 wars have cost at least \$8 trillion, taken millions
of lives, and displaced tens of millions of people globally, while
precipitating [climate
chaos](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/analysis/2020/no-warming-no-war/)
through their polluting emissions. If implemented, Wicker's plan would
only increase the risk of yet more destabilizing conflicts, offering a
modern *Pax Romana* promise for yet more war and death.

**Peace, Peace, When There Is No Peace**

While extremist Republican politicians and appointees are leading the
way on Project 2025, both major parties align around building up the war
economy. Indeed, bipartisan support for military aid to Israel is
contributing to what the United Nations has labeled a genocide in Gaza.

Nor is this new. Every year, the Pentagon budget invariably passes with
widespread bipartisan support, even if a few representatives vote
otherwise. Since the 9/11 attacks, in fact, [\$21
trillion](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/pressroom/articles/2021/09/03/us-spent-21-trillion-on-militarization-since-911/#:~:text=Their%20key%20finding%20—%20that%20the,is%20every%20bit%20as%20revealing.)
has been funneled into war, surveillance, policing, border control, and
incarceration. In Fiscal Year 2023, nearly
[two-thirds](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/analysis/2023/warfare-state-how-funding-militarism-compromises-our-welfare/)
of the federal discretionary budget funded the military-industrial
complex and militarized spending. This year, a Democratic amendment to
the National Defense Authorization Act will [automatically
register](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/selective-service-draft/)
every male citizen and resident aged 18-26 in the selective service
database. This measure has only passed in the House of Representatives,
but it suggests interest across party lines in increasing the number of
individuals who could someday be called up for military service. While
this is not (yet) a draft, it hints at one --- and it was introduced by
Pennsylvania's Democratic Congresswoman Chrissy Houlahan.

The state and local counterpart to militarism is support for the police.
Both
[Republican](https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2021-06-19/amid-reform-movement-some-gop-states-give-police-more-power)
and
[Democratic](https://www.axios.com/2024/03/12/crime-democrat-states-republican)
lawmakers seem intent on adopting "[tough on
crime](https://www.politico.com/news/2024/03/07/liberal-cities-crime-policies-00145532)"
legislation, including hiring more police officers, deploying the
National Guard more widely, expanding surveillance measures, and
recriminalizing drug possession. Of course, the [1033
program](https://www.aclu.org/news/criminal-law-reform/federal-militarization-of-law-enforcement-must-end)
allows local police forces to be armed and [trained by the U.S.
military](https://www.themarshallproject.org/mp-graphics/201412-dod/embed.html).

This remarkably bipartisan consensus for a war economy shouldn't just be
considered another "issue," but an approach to governance that relies on
force and violence, rather than consent, to establish social control.
And as noted above, the nation may have automatic registration for the
selective service system before we have automatic registration to vote.
After all, the same Congress that supports ever more resources for war
has failed to stop voter suppression, expand voting rights, or
adequately protect our democracy.

**Jobs and Homes, Not Death in the Streets**

The greatest violence of the *Pax Romana* was always borne by the
poor, who were often ripped from their families, enslaved in
back-breaking labor, and dispossessed of their land and resources. To
maintain its authoritarian rule over millions of people, the Roman
Empire relied on its military might and the fear inspired by its brutal
army. And yet it was from the ranks of the poor that Jesus and his
disciples led a non-violent revolution for peace.

Today, tens of millions of poor people in this country are on the front
lines of our failing democracy and increasingly militarized society.
They are the true canaries in the coal mine, already living through the
violence of a society that has prioritized war and profits over
addressing the pain and toll of low-wage jobs, crushing debt burdens,
polluted water and land, and lives cut short by poverty, the police, and
the denial of basic human rights. They can undoubtedly also foresee the
drive toward an ever-deeper warfare state and the possible fallout from
Project 2025 if Donald Trump and J.D. Vance win this year.

Forged in the crucible of violence, the criminalized and impoverished
still call out for a true peace.

On June 29th, Reverend Savina Martin, a military veteran and formerly
homeless mother, took to the stage of the Poor People's Campaign's [Mass
Assembly](https://www.poorpeoplescampaign.org/mm2024/) in Washington,
D.C., and shared these thoughts:

> "I am a US Army veteran and I was impacted by homelessness many years
> ago. Today, thousands of homeless veterans are fighting for \[their\]
> benefits, housing... navigating a complex system while sick and
> suffering, trying to survive the war waged against the poor.
> Yesterday, the US Supreme Court decision in *Grants Pass v. Johnson*
> permits cities to criminalize homelessness by enforcing bans on
> sleeping outside when no shelter is available. How can sleeping while
> homeless be against the law? If you sleep, you get arrested?

> "This system depends on us to fight their wars, but we can't depend on
> \[our government\] to guarantee housing or healthcare? Instead, \[our
> government\] allocates \$1.1 trillion to war, weapons, and a system
> that criminalizes the poor, leading to mass incarceration,
> deportations, and detentions. We want jobs and homes, not death in the
> streets."

Savina was speaking of the war on the poor, the power of the
military-industrial complex, and an extremist agenda that will connect
her in unsettling ways with 140 million poor and low-income people in
this country --- and billions more around the world. As in other moments
of history, the struggle of the poor for life and dignity in a world
that denies them both is a struggle for the best that we can be as a
society. In their leadership lies the hope for us all --- not in Project
2025, a future Trump administration, or the all-too-devastating version
of a *Pax Americana* that would go with it, but in the peace (and
justice) that Savina and so many others are demanding, and will continue
to push for, until it is ours. 

Copyright 2024 Liz Theoharis and Shailly Gupta Barnes

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Liz Theoharis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/)

**Liz Theoharis**,
a [*TomDispatch* regular](https://tomdispatch.com/everybody-in-nobody-out/),
is a theologian, ordained minister, and anti-poverty activist. Co-chair
of the [Poor People's Campaign: A National Call for Moral
Revival](http://www.poorpeoplescampaign.org/) and director of
the [Kairos Center for Religions, Rights and Social
Justice](http://www.kairoscenter.org/) at Union Theological Seminary in
New York City, she is the author of [*Always With Us? What Jesus Really
Said About the
Poor*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0802875025/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
and [*We Cry Justice: Reading the Bible with the Poor People\'s
Campaign*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506473644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
Follow her on Twitter at [\@liztheo](https://twitter.com/liztheo).

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/)

#### [Shailly Gupta Barnes](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/shaillyguptabarnes/)

**Shailly Gupta Barnes** is the Policy Director of the [Kairos
Center for Rights, Religions and Social
Justice](https://kairoscenter.org/) and the [Poor People\'s Campaign: A
National Call for Moral Revival](https://www.poorpeoplescampaign.org/).
She has a background in law, economics, and human rights and has spent
nearly 20 years working with and for poor and dispossessed communities.

Thanks to \<a href=\"https://tomdispatch.com\"\>TomDispatch\</a\>, where
this article originally appeared without the title image.

-   [ ](https://tomdispatch.com/books/splinterlands/)
