# From the Arsenal of Democracy to an Arsenal of Genocide

![](astore-genocide.jpg){class="a"}

## By [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

During World War II, American leaders proudly proclaimed this country
the "[arsenal of
democracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsenal_of_Democracy),"
supplying weapons and related materiel to allies like Great Britain and
the Soviet Union. To cite just one example, I recall reading about
Soviet armored units equipped with U.S. Sherman tanks, though the
Soviets had an even better tank of their own in the T-34 and its many
variants. However, recent news that the United States is providing yet
more massive arms deliveries to Israel ([worth \$20
billion](https://news.antiwar.com/2024/08/13/state-department-approves-over-20-billion-arms-package-for-israel/))
for
[2026](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/08/22/world/middleeast/the-white-house-signals-long-term-support-for-israel-hoping-to-avert-a-regional-war.html)
and thereafter caught me off guard.  Israel quite plainly is engaged in
the near-total destruction of Gaza and the massacre of Palestinians
there.  So, tell me, how over all these years did the self-styled
arsenal of democracy become an arsenal of genocide?

Israel, after all, couldn't demolish Gaza, killing [at least
40,000](https://news.antiwar.com/2024/08/15/gaza-health-ministry-says-over-40000-killed-by-israeli-onslaught/)
Palestinians in a population of only 2.1 million, including
[thousands](https://euromedmonitor.org/en/article/6437/The-boodiest-face-of-its-genocide:-Israel-has-killed-2,100-Palestinian-infants-and-toddlers-in-Gaza)
of babies and infants, without massive infusions of U.S.
weaponry. Often, the U.S. doesn't even sell the weaponry to Israel, a
rich country that can pay its own bills. Congress just freely gifts
body- and baby-shredding bombs in the name of defending Israel from
Hamas. Obviously, by hook or crook, or rather by shells,
[bombs](https://zeteo.com/p/exclusive-biden-administration-sending), and
missiles, Israel is intent on rendering Gaza Palestinian-free and
granting Israelis more living space there (and [on the West
Bank](https://tomdispatch.com/settled/)). That's not "defense" --- it's
the 2024 equivalent of [Old Testament-style vengeance by
annihilation](https://chrishedges.substack.com/p/thou-shalt-not-commit-genocide).

As Tacitus said of the rampaging Romans two millennia ago, so it can now
be said of Israel: they create a desert --- a black hole of death in
Gaza --- and call it "peace." And the U.S. government enables it or, in
the case of Congress,
[cheers](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/netanyahu-and-biden-speak)
on its ringleader, Israeli Prime Minister Bibi Netanyahu.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1984879235/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Of course, anyone who knows a little American history should have some
knowledge of genocide. In the seventeenth century, Native Americans were
often "satanized" by early colonial settlers. (In 1994, a friend of
mine, the historian David Lovejoy, wrote a
[superb](https://www.jstor.org/stable/366436) and all-too-aptly titled
article on exactly that topic: "Satanizing the American Indian.")
Associating Indians with the devil made it all the easier for the white
man to mistreat them, push them off their lands, and subjugate or
eradicate them. When you satanize an enemy, turning them into something
irredeemably evil, all crimes become defensible, rational, even
justifiable. For how can you even consider negotiating or compromising
with the minions of Satan?

Growing up, I was a strong supporter of Israel, seeing that state as an
embattled David fighting against a Goliath, most notably during the Yom
Kippur War of 1973. Forty years later, I wrote [an
article](https://bracingviews.com/2014/07/22/david-versus-goliath-in-the-middle-east/)
suggesting that Israel was now the Goliath in the region with
Palestinians in Gaza playing the role of a very much outgunned and
persecuted David. An American-Jewish friend told me I just didn't get
it. The Palestinians in Gaza were all terrorists, latent or incipient
ones in the case of the infants and babies there. At the time, I found
this attitude uncommon and extreme, but events have proven it to be far
too common (though it certainly remains extreme). Obviously, on some
level, the U.S. government agrees that extremism in the pursuit of
Israeli hegemony is no vice and so has provided Israel with the weaponry
and military cover it needs to "exterminate all the brutes." Thus, in
2024, the U.S. "cradle of democracy" reveals its very own [heart of
darkness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurtz_(Heart_of_Darkness)).

**Looking Again at the World Wars That Made America "Great"**

When considering World Wars I and II, we tend to see them as discrete
events rather than intimately connected. One was fought from 1914 to
1918, the other from 1939 to 1945. Americans are far more familiar with
the Second World War than the First. From both wars this country emerged
remarkably unscathed compared to places like France, Germany, Russia,
the United Kingdom, China, and Japan. Add to that the comforting myth
that America's "greatest generation" pretty much won World War II,
thereby saving democracy (and "[Saving Private
Ryan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saving_Private_Ryan)" as well).

Perhaps, however, we should imagine those years of conflict, 1914-1945,
as a European civil war (with an Asian wing thrown in the second time
around), a new Thirty Years' War played out on a world stage that led to
the demise of Europe's imperial powers and their Asian equivalent and
the rise of the American empire as their replacement. Germanic
militarism and nationalism were defeated but at an enormous cost,
especially to Russia in World War I and the Soviet Union in World War
II. Meanwhile, the American empire, unlike Germany's Second and Third
Reichs or Japan's imperial power, truly became for a time an untrammeled
world [militarist
hegemon](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-the-militarization-of-everything/)
with the inevitable corruption inherent in the urge for near-absolute
power.

Vast levels of destruction visited upon this planet by two world wars
left an opening for Washington to attempt to dominate everywhere. Hence,
the roughly [750 overseas
bases](https://tomdispatch.com/the-all-american-base-world/) its
military set up to ensure its ultimate global reach, not to speak of the
powerful navy it created, centered on aircraft carriers for power
projection and nuclear submarines for possible global Armageddon, and an
air force that saw open skies as an excuse for its own exercises in
naked power projection. To this you could add, for a time, U.S. global
economic and financial power, enhanced by a cultural dominance achieved
through Hollywood, sports, music, and the like.

Not, of course, that the United States emerged utterly unchallenged from
World War II. Communism was the specter that haunted its leaders,
whether in the Soviet Union, China, or Southeast Asia (where, in the
1960s and early 1970s, it would fight a disastrous losing war, the first
of many to come, in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia). Here, there, and
everywhere, even under the very beds of Americans, there was a fear of
the "[commie rat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z0YpTfXZdyo)." And for
a while, communism, in its Soviet form, did indeed threaten capitalism's
unbridled pursuit of profits, helping American officials to create a
permanent domestic war state in the name of containing and rolling back
that threat. The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 erased that fear,
but not the permanent war state that went with it, as Washington sought
new enemies to justify a Pentagon budget that today is [still
rising](https://tomdispatch.com/spending-unlimited-2/) toward the
trillion-dollar mark. Naturally (and remarkably disastrously), it found
them, whether in Afghanistan, Iraq, or so many other places in the case
of the costly and ultimately futile Global War on Terror in the
aftermath of the 9/11 attacks.

And eternally losing (or at least not winning) its wars raised the
question: What will replace it? What will happen as imperial America
continues to decline, burdened by colossal debt and strategic overreach,
and crippled from within by a rapacious class of oligarchs who fancy
themselves as a new all-American aristocracy. Will that decline lead to
collapse or can its officials orchestrate a soft landing? In World Wars
I and II, Europeans fought bitterly for world dominance, powered by
militarism, nationalism, racism, and greed. They suffered accordingly
and yet did recover even if as far less powerful nations. Can the U.S.
manage to curb its own militarism, nationalism, racism, and greed in
time and so recover similarly? And by "racism," I mean, for example,
reviving the idea (however put) of China as a "yellow peril," or the
tendency to see the darker-skinned peoples of the Middle East as violent
"terrorists" and the latest minions of Satan.

And then, of course, there's always the fear that, in the future, a
world war could once again break out, raising the possibility of the use
of nuclear weapons from global arsenals that are always being
"modernized" and the possible end of most life on Earth. It's an issue
worth highlighting, since the U.S. [continues to
"invest"](https://tomdispatch.com/the-triad-is-not-the-trinity/)
significant sums in producing yet more nuclear weapons, even as it
ratchets up tensions with [nuclear powers like Russia and
China](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/19/us/politics/china-nuclear-weapons-russia-arms-treaties.html).
Though a winnable nuclear war among the great powers on this planet is
inconceivable, that hasn't stopped my country from pushing for a version
of nuclear superiority (disguised, of course, as "deterrence").

**Making America Sane Again**

The world wars of the previous century facilitated America's global
dominance in virtually all its dimensions. That, in fact, was their
legacy. No other nation in history had, without irony or humility,
divided the globe into military [combatant
commands](https://www.defense.gov/About/combatant-commands/) like
AFRICOM for Africa, CENTCOM for the Middle East, and NORTHCOM here at
home. There are also "global" commands for strategic nuclear weapons,
cyber dominance, and even the dominance of space. It seemed that the
only way America could be "safe" was by dominating everything everywhere
all at once. That insane ambition, that vainglory, was truly what made
the U.S. the "exceptional" nation on the world stage.

Such a boundless pursuit of dominance, absurdly disguised as benefiting
democracy, is now visibly fraying at the seams and may soon come apart
entirely. In 2024, it's beyond obvious that the United States no longer
dominates the world, even if its military-industrial-congressional
complex (MICC) does indeed dominate its [national (in)security
state](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/dominating-everyone-everywhere-all)
and so increasingly the country. What an irony, in fact, that defeating
European militarism in two world wars only accelerated the growth of
American militarism and nationalism, making the world's lone superpower
for so many decades the scariest country for all too many peoples
outside its borders.

Think, in fact, of the U.S. emerging from World War II with what might
be thought of as victory disease. The last nearly 80 years of its
foreign policy witnessed the remarkable progression of that "disease,"
despite a lack of actual victories (unless you count minor escapades
like the [invasion of
Grenada](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_invasion_of_Grenada)).
Put differently, the U.S. emerged from World War II so singularly an
economic, financial, and cultural juggernaut that subsequent military
defeats almost didn't seem to matter.

Even as America's economic, financial, and cultural power has wans"
admission, along with support for Israel's ongoing genocide), the
government does continueed in this century, along with its moral
position (consider President Obama's curt "[We tortured some*
*](https://www.politico.com/story/2014/08/john-brennan-torture-cia-109654)*folks*
to double-down on military spending. Pentagon budgets and related
"national security" costs now [significantly exceed \$1
trillion](https://tomdispatch.com/spending-unlimited-2/) annually even
as arms shipments and sales continue to surge. War, in other words, has
become big business in America or, as General Smedley Butler so
memorably put it 90 years ago, a first-class
"[racket](https://bracingviews.com/2018/09/17/war-is-a-racket-2/)."

Worse yet, war, however prolonged and even celebrated, may be the very
definition of insanity, a deadly poison to democracy. Don't tell that to
the MICC and all its straphangers and camp followers, though.

Ironically, the two countries, Germany and Japan, that the U.S. took
credit for utterly defeating in World War II, forcing their
unconditional surrender, have over time emerged in far better shape.
Neither of them is perfect, mind you, but they largely have been able to
avoid the militarism, nationalism, and constant warmongering that so
infects and weakens American-style democracy today. Whatever else you
can say about Germany and Japan in 2024, neither of them is bent in any
fashion on either regional or global domination, nor are their leaders
bragging of having the finest military in all human history. American
presidents from George W. Bush to Barack Obama have indeed bragged about
having a matchless, peerless,
"[finest](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-we-re-number-one-in-self-promotion/)"
military. The Germans and Japanese, having known the bitter price of
such boasts, have kept their mouths shut.

My brother has a saying: no brag, just facts. And when we look at facts,
the pursuit of global dominance has been driving the American empire
toward an early grave. The "finest" military lost disastrously, of
course, in Vietnam in the last century, and in Afghanistan and Iraq in
this one. It functionally lost its self-proclaimed Global War on Terror
and it keeps losing in its febrile quest for superiority everywhere.

If we met a person dressed in a military uniform who insisted he was
Napoleon, boasted that his Imperial Guard was the world's best, and that
he could rule the world, we would, of course, question his sanity. Why
are we not questioning the collective sanity of America's military and
foreign-policy elites?

This country doesn't need to be made great again, it needs to be made
sane again by the rejection of wars and the weaponry that goes with
them. For if we continue to follow our present pathway, MADness could
truly lie in wait for us, as in the classic nuclear weapons phrase,
mutually assured destruction (MAD).

Another form of madness is having a president [routinely implore
God](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2024/07/14/remarks-by-president-biden-2/)
--- yes, no one else! --- to protect our troops. This is not a knock on
Joe Biden alone. He's just professing a nationalist piety that's
designed to win applause and votes. Assuming Biden has the Christian God
in mind, consider the irony, not to say heresy, of functionally begging
Christ, the Prince of Peace, to protect those who are already armed to
the teeth. It's also an abdication of the commander-in-chief's
responsibility to support and defend the U.S. Constitution while
protecting those troops himself. Who has the biggest impact, God or the
president, when it comes to ensuring that troops aren't sent into harm's
way without a justifiable cause supported by the American people through
a Congressional declaration of war?

Consider the repeated act of looking skyward to God to support military
actions as a major league cop-out. But that's what U.S. presidents
routinely do now. Such is the pernicious price of pursuing a vision that
insists on global reach, global power, and global dominance. America's
leaders have, in essence, elevated themselves to a god-like position, a
distinctly angry, jealous, and capricious one, far more like Zeus or
Ares than Jesus. Speaking of Jesus, he is alleged to have said, "[Suffer
the
children](https://www.compassion.com/poverty/suffer-the-little-children.htm)
to come unto me." The militarized American god, however, says: suffer
the children of Gaza to die courtesy of bombs and shells made here in
the U.S.A. and shipped off to Israel at a remarkably modest price (given
the destruction they cause).

To echo a popular ad campaign, Jesus [may "get"
us](https://hegetsus.com/en), but our leaders (self-avowed Christians,
[all](https://www.amazon.com/Faith-Donald-Trump-Spiritual-Biography/dp/0062749587))
sure as hell don't get him. I may be a lapsed Catholic, not a practicing
one like Joe Biden, but even I remember my catechism and a certain
commandment that *Thou shalt not kill*.

Copyright 2024 William Astore

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

**William J. Astore**, a retired lieutenant colonel (USAF) and
professor of history, is
a [*TomDispatch* regular ](https://tomdispatch.com/are-the-best-years-of-my-country-behind-me/)and
a senior fellow at the Eisenhower Media Network (EMN), an organization
of critical veteran military and national security professionals. His
personal substack is [*Bracing Views*](https://bracingviews.com/). His
video testimony for the Merchants of Death Tribunal is available [at
this
link](https://rumble.com/v4cruwx-the-military-industrial-complex-lt.-col.-william-astore.html).

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

Thanks to "[TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com)" where this
article originally appeared, without the title image.
