# Militarism Abuse Disorder

![](berrigan-mad-1.png){class="a"}

### A Very American Malaise

## By [Frida Berrigan](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/fridaberrigan/)

My name is Frida and my community is military dependent. (I feel, by the
way, like I'm introducing myself at a very strange AA-like meeting with
lousy coffee.) As with people who have substance abuse disorders, I'm
part of a very large club. After all, there are weapons manufacturers
and subcontractors [in just
about](https://tomdispatch.com/congress-has-been-captured-by-the-arms-industry/)
every congressional district in the
[country](https://oldcc.gov/sites/default/files/OLDCC_DSBS_FY2021_FINAL_WEB.pdf),
so that members of Congress will never forget whom they are really
working for: the military-industrial complex.

Using the vernacular of the day, perhaps it's particularly on target to
say that our whole country suffers from Militarism Abuse Disorder or
(all too appropriately) MAD.

I must confess that I don't like to admit to my military dependency. Who
does? In my case, it's a tough one for a few reasons, the biggest being
that I'm an avowed pacifist who believes that war is a crime against
humanity, a failure of the imagination, and never (no, *not ever*)
necessary. Along with the rest of my family of five, I live [below the
taxable
income](https://nwtrcc.org/war-tax-resistance-resources/pamphlets/practical-war-tax-resistance-5/)
level. That way, we don't pay [into a
system](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/analysis/2024/tax-day-2024/)
that funds war preparations and war-making. We have to be a little
creative to make our money stretch further and we don't eat out or go to
the movies every week. But we don't ever feel deprived as a result. In
essence, I've traded career success and workplace achievement for a
[slightly clearer
conscience](https://www.warresisters.org/store/where-your-income-tax-money-really-goes-fy2025)
and time --- time to work to end militarism and break our collective
addiction!

The Peter G. Peterson Foundation
[estimates](https://www.pgpf.org/budget-basics/budget-explainer-national-defense)
that, in 2023, the United States of America spent \$142 billion buying
weapons systems and another \$122 billion on the research and
development of future weaponry and other militarized equipment. And keep
in mind that those big numbers represent only a small fraction of any
Pentagon budget, the latest of which the Pentagon's proposing to be
[\$849.8
billion](https://breakingdefense.com/2024/03/defense-budget-2025-defense-spending-biden-how-much-money-does-the-pentagon-get/)
for 2025 --- and that's just one year (and [not all of what
passes](https://tomdispatch.com/fueling-the-warfare-state/) for
"national defense" spending either). A recent analysis by the Costs of
War Project at Brown University
[calculated](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/economic/budget)
that, since September 11, 2001, the United States has used an estimated
\$8 trillion-plus just for its post-9/11 wars. Talk about addiction! It
makes me pretty MAD, if I'm being honest with you!

It would be nice to ignore such monstrous numbers and the even bigger
implications they suggest, to unfocus my eyes slightly as I regularly
drive by the fenced facilities, manicured office parks, and noisy,
bustling shipyards that make up the mega-billion-dollar-a-year industry
right in my own neighborhood that's preparing for... well, yes... the
end of the world. Instead, I'm trying to be clear-eyed and aware. I'm
checking my personal life all the time for compromise or conciliation
with militarism: Am I being brainwashed when I find myself cheering for
the fighters in that blockbuster movie we splurged on? Am I doing enough
to push for a ceasefire in Gaza? Am I showing up with young people in my
community who are backing higher salaries for teachers and no more
police in schools? And of course, I keep asking myself: How are my daily
consumer decisions lining up with my lofty politics?

I don't always like the answers that come up in response to such
questions, but I keep asking them, keep trying, keep pushing. Those who
suffer from Militarism Abuse Disorder can't even ask the questions,
because they're distracted by the promises of good jobs, nice
apartments, and cheap consumer goods that the military-industrial
complex is always claiming are right around the corner.

But here in my community, they never deliver!

**New London: A Profile of Militarism Abuse Disorder**

[New London
](https://www.ctdatahaven.org/sites/ctdatahaven/files/new_london_profile_v1.pdf)is
a town of fewer than 28,000 people. The median income here is a little
over \$46,000 --- \$32,000 less than the state average. We are a very
[old community](https://connecticuthistory.org/towns-page/new-london/).
Long part of the fishing and hunting grounds of the [Eastern
Pequots,](https://www.easternpequottribalnation.org/)
[Nehantics](https://nehanticnation.com/), [Mashantucket
Pequot](https://www.mptn-nsn.gov/), and
[Mohegan](https://www.mohegan.nsn.us/), the city was founded in the
1600s and incorporated in the late 1700s. You see evidence of our age in
the shape of our streets, curbed and meandering, long ago carved out of
fields by cows and wagons, and in our architecture --- aging industrial
buildings, warehouses, and ice houses in the neighborhoods where their
workers once lived --- now derelict and empty or repurposed as auto
repair stores or barber shops.

Sometimes I watch, almost mesmerized by the ferocious energy of all
those cars careening up Howard Street on their way to work at [General
Dynamics](https://www.gdeb.com/). Car after car headed for work at the
very break of day. Every workday at about 3 p.m., they reverse course, a
river of steel and plastic rushing and then idling in traffic, trying to
get out of town as fast as possible.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

General Dynamics Electric Boat repairs, services, and manufactures
submarines armed with both conventional and nuclear weapons. And it
certainly tells you something about our world that the company is in the
midst of a [major hiring
jag,](https://www.cbia.com/news/featured/electric-boat-workforce/)
looking to fill thousands of positions in New London, Groton, and
coastal Rhode Island to build the
[Columbia-class](http://columbia-class.com/) submarine, the next
generation of nuclear-powered, nuclear-armed subs. Those behemoths of
human ingenuity and engineering will [cost
taxpayers](https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/navys-132000000000-columbia-class-submarine-has-problem-211960)
a whopping \$132 billion, with each of the 12 new boats clocking in at
about \$15 billion --- and mind you, that's before anything even goes
wrong or the schedule to produce them predictably stretches out and out.
The company has already solved one big problem: how to [wring maximum
profits](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/pentagon-budget-price-gouging-military-contractors-60-minutes-2023-05-21/)
out of this next generation of planet-obliteration-capable subs. And
that's a problem that isn't even particularly hard to sort out, because
some of those
[contracts](https://investorrelations.gd.com/news/press-release-details/2023/General-Dynamics-Electric-Boat-Awarded-967-Million-Contract-Modification-for-Virginia-Class-Submarines/default.aspx)
are "cost plus," meaning [the
company](https://news.usni.org/2019/11/13/first-2-columbia-ssbns-will-have-cost-plus-contract-remaining-subs-will-be-fixed-price)
says what the project costs and then adds a percentage on top of that as
profit.

Such a cost-plus business bothers me a lot. I could *almost* be
converted into a hard-nosed militarist if our weapons production
industry was a nonprofit set of organizations, run with the kind of
shoestring ingenuity that dozens of outfits in New London employ to feed
the hungry, house the homeless, and care for the victims of domestic
violence.

I break from my traffic-watching fugue on Howard Street to reflect on
all that furious effort, all those advanced degrees, all that almost
impossible intelligence being poured into making an even better, bigger,
faster, sleeker, stealthier weapons-delivery system, capable of carrying
and firing conventional and nuclear warheads. Why? We have [so many
already](https://www.sublant.usff.navy.mil/About-Us/Submarine-Facts/).
And as the only nation that has ever used nuclear weapons in war (in
1945) and has
[tested](https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2024-07/focus/looming-threat-renewed-us-nuclear-testing),
perfected, and helped
[proliferate](https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/nuclear-weapons-who-has-what-glance)
the technology of ultimate destruction for the last eight decades, the
United States should be leading the charge to denuclearize, disarm, and
abolish such weaponry. That, after all, is what's called for in the
[Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons](https://disarmament.unoda.org/wmd/nuclear/tpnw/).

If we are ever going to break our MAD addiction, one place to start is
here on Howard Street with people who make their living working on one
tiny component of this incredibly complex system. [Economic
conversion](https://ips-dc.org/from-a-militarized-to-a-decarbonized-economy-a-case-for-conversion/),
moving resources and skills and jobs from the military-industrial
complex to civilian sectors, is a big project. And it could indeed begin
right here on Howard Street.

**You Get What You Pay For**

Our small town is also home to the Coast Guard Academy and two private
colleges. Add the acreage of those three non-taxpaying institutions to
the nearly 30 churches, synagogues, and other houses of worship that
enjoy tax-free status here; throw in the dozens of nonprofits that do
all the good work** **and you end up with an awfully small tax base.
As a result, the municipal budget leans heavily on commercial taxpayers
like [General Dynamics Electric Boat](https://www.gdeb.com/), the
military-industrial behemoth that moved into 24 acres of prime
waterfront real estate in 2009 after it was vacated by the tax scofflaw
[Pfizer](https://ij.org/ll/the-end-of-an-eminent-domain-error-pfizer-closes-in-new-london/).

General Dynamics, like other military manufacturers, essentially only
has one customer to please, the United States government. That makes
the cost-plus contracting scheme even more egregious, guaranteeing that,
no matter what goes wrong, its profits are always assured. Such a
bonkers, counter-capitalist scenario passes all the costs on to American
taxpayers and allows the privately held corporation to pocket all the
profits, while handing out fat dividends to its shareholders. According
to [Sahm
Capitol](https://www.sahmcapital.com/news/content/we-think-shareholders-are-less-likely-to-approve-a-large-pay-rise-for-general-dynamics-corporations-nysegd-ceo-for-now-2024-04-25),
"Over the past three years, General Dynamics' Earnings Per Share grew by
3.7% and over the past three years, the total shareholder return was
62%."

For 2024, General Dynamics Electric Boat is paying taxes on property
valued at \$90.8 million --- almost twice as much as that of the next
highest taxpayer in our town. But it is also a bone of contention. The
company, which paid [CEO Phebe
Novakovic](https://aflcio.org/paywatch/GD) \$22.5 million in salary and
stock awards in 2023, has no trouble taking the City of New London to
court when they feel like their property is being overvalued or
overtaxed. They win, too, so their property valuations yo-yo year to
year when New London has been ordered to repay taxes to General
Dynamics. Whether they pay taxes based on \$90.8 million in property or
\$57 million doesn't really matter to the company. It's literal pocket
change to the Pentagon's [third largest weapons
contractor](https://dsm.forecastinternational.com/2024/03/01/top-100-defense-contractors-2023/),
a company that boasted \$42.3 billion in revenue in 2023. But it matters
a lot in a place like New London, where the annual budget process
routinely shaves jobs from the schools, public works, and the civil
service to make the columns all add up.

According to a [report
](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2017/Job%20Opportunity%20Cost%20of%20War%20-%20HGP%20-%20FINAL.pdf)by
Heidi Garrett-Peltier for the Costs of War Project at Brown University,
\$1 million of federal spending in the military sector creates 6.9 jobs
(5.8 direct jobs and 1.1 in the supply chain). That same \$1 million
would create 8.4 jobs in the wind energy sector or 9.5 jobs in solar
energy. Investing \$1 million in energy efficiency retrofits creates
10.6 jobs. Use that \$1 million to build streets or highways or tunnels
or bridges or to repair schools and it will create "over 40 percent more
jobs than the military, with a total multiplier of 9.8 jobs per \$1
million spending."

Wait, what? Are you telling me that, with their lack of transparency,
accountability, and their cost-plus contracts, while building weapons
systems for the sole purpose of destruction and wasting a lot of money
in the process, the military-industrial complex is a lousy job creator?
Am I to understand that spending money on just about *anything* else
creates more jobs and more economic activity, while not threatening the
world with annihilation?

As I work on a local level in my small town in Connecticut, I see how
municipal policy should prioritize small businesses, mom-and-pop stores
made of brick and mortar, over multinational corporations or big
business. I see the return on investment from a small business in
granular and tangible ways: the grocery store owner who starts each day
by picking up garbage in his parking lot, the funeral home that sponsors
the Little League team, the woman at the art gallery and frame shop who
waters the street flowers, or the self-employed local photographer who
serves on the board of the cooperative grocery store.

These businesses don't employ tens of thousands of people, but they also
don't insist on tax abatements that undermine our local budget or fill
our crowded streets with commuters hell-bent on getting away from the
office and our town as quickly as possible.

You get what you pay for, right? Garrett-Peltier's Costs of War report
goes on to note that "healthcare spending creates more than twice as
many jobs for the same level of spending, while education creates up to
nearly three times as many jobs as defense spending... The employment
multipliers for these domestic programs are 14.3 for healthcare, 19.2
for primary and secondary education, and 11.2 for higher education; the
average figure for education is 15.2 jobs per \$1 million spending."

These are numbers I wish my City Council would commit to memory. In
fact, we should all know these numbers by heart, because they counter
the dominant narrative that military spending is good for the economy
and that good-paying jobs depend on militarism.

The United States is investing trillions of dollars in the military, as
well as in weapons contractors like General Dynamics, Boeing, and
Lockheed Martin. Every U.S. president in modern history has prioritized
the bottom lines of those corporations over a safe and healthy future
for the next generation. Consider all of that as just so many symptoms
of Militarism Abuse Syndrome. Isn't it finally time to get really mad at
MAD? Let's kick the habit and get clean!

Copyright 2024 Frida Berrigan

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Frida Berrigan](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/fridaberrigan/)

Frida Berrigan is the author of [*It Runs In The Family: On Being
Raised by Radicals and Growing into Rebellious
Motherhood*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1939293650/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
She is
a [*T*](https://tomdispatch.com/a-christmas-confession/)[*omDispatch* regular](https://tomdispatch.com/how-to-survive-us/),
writes occasionally for
[WagingNonviolence.Org](http://wagingnonviolence.org/), and serves on
the Board of [Kirkridge Retreat and Study
Center](https://kirkridge.org/). She has three children and lives in New
London, Connecticut, where she is a gardener and community organizer.

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/fridaberrigan/)

Thanks to 
"[TomDispatch.com](https://Tomdispatch.com/)"
where this article first appeared -- without the
title image
