# The Empire Is Going Down

![](engelhardt-empire-going-down.png){class="a"}

### But What Isn\'t?

## By [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

He's the man of the hour (and you can choose your hour), win, lose, or
draw. I mean, who can deny it? Certainly not the crowd at his debate
with Kamala Harris that, as he [reminded
us](https://www.the-independent.com/news/world/americas/us-politics/trump-audience-harris-debate-gutfeld-b2615455.html)
recently, absolutely "went crazy" over what he had to say. (And it
couldn't matter less that the event had no live audience whatsoever.) In
a sense, he isn't wrong. After all, it's still all too possible that, in
a couple of weeks, he could once again be elected --- yes! --- president
of the United States.

Indeed, it's as yet unclear whether American voters will decline The
Donald, but what is increasingly clear --- there can't be a doubt on the
subject --- is that he himself is [on the
decline](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2024/oct/06/trump-behavior-final-meltdown)
in a typically wild and mad sort of way. And yet he might indeed still
be elected to lead (even if that hardly seems the right word anymore)
this country. And what exactly does that tell us about this all-American
world of ours?

All too much, I fear. Above all, that it's increasingly anything but
all-American.

Can you believe that only 30-plus years ago, after the Soviet Union
collapsed, this country, the very one Donald Trump might once again
preside over, was considered (at least in Washington) the "[lone
superpower](https://www.airandspaceforces.com/article/0792edit/)" on
planet Earth? And in some sense, it actually was. After all, the great
European imperial powers were ancient history by then, the Russians in a
state of post-Cold War devastation, and Communist China had yet to truly
begin its rise. But like all great imperial powers, it should now be far
clearer that, in the wake of a seemingly [endless series of lost
wars](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-turning-victory-into-defeat/)
abroad, its global "moment" has long been ending. Its ability to command
or direct the world now seems largely a thing of the past. There can be
little question any more that the (increasingly dis-)United States is an
imperial power on the decline.

**Make America Grotesque Again?**

Don't misunderstand me. This country remains all too powerful when it
comes to its military and nuclear forces. Just check out the latest
[Pentagon
budget](https://www.defensenews.com/pentagon/2024/03/11/pentagon-unveils-850-billion-budget-request-amid-spending-uncertainty/)
or the [more than
40,000](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/30/us/politics/us-deploys-troops-middle-east.html)
American military personnel,
[battleships](https://www.axios.com/2024/08/28/us-warships-middle-east-iran-israel-war),
[aircraft
carriers](https://www.militarytimes.com/news/pentagon-congress/2024/08/26/two-us-aircraft-carriers-to-stay-in-middle-east-after-hezbollah-attack/),
[jet fighter
planes](https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/pentagon-tells-israel-it-will-adjust-us-troops-middle-east-2024-08-02/),
and who knows what else deployed to a Middle East that Israel is now
blowing sky-high. But if you want a measurement of just how far the Lone
Superpower has fallen, keep in mind that, once upon a time not so
terribly long ago, an Israeli leader like Benjamin Netanyahu would never
have dared to pay so little attention to the desires of Washington when
it came to his actions in the Middle East. Once upon a time, a figure
like Netanyahu couldn't have ignored [the wishes of the top
officials](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/07/us/politics/biden-israel-oct-7-gaza-hamas.html)
of the very country still arming his own in a [staggering
fashion](https://www.ap.org/news-highlights/spotlights/2024/us-spends-a-record-17-9-billion-on-military-aid-to-israel-since-last-oct-7/),
while doing whatever he damn well pleased to tear his region to shreds.

Consider him visible evidence that this country is indeed no longer the
world's lone superpower (and not just because of the rise of China
either). Yes, the Pentagon budget remains a staggering (and [still
increasing](https://tomdispatch.com/spending-unlimited-2/)) affair, but
something has certainly changed. Consider it anything but symbolic
(though it is that, too) that 81-year-old Joe Biden is by far the oldest
president in American history. (Ronald Reagan left office at age 77.)
Worse yet, should Donald Trump win re-election this November and last
until the end of his term, he would set a new record and [leave
Biden](https://www.washingtonpost.com/elections/2024/06/14/donald-trump-age-birthday-president/)
in the aging dust of history.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

While it no longer even occurs to observers to use a phrase like "lone
superpower" when it comes to the United States, it still seems that, in
a deeper sense, the reality of this country's imperial decline has yet
to be fully taken in here, even by those who no longer see it as the
operative great power on Planet Earth. In truth, it's not just that it
has lost much of its grandeur and influence abroad but that, though this
is seldom mentioned in such a context, it's visibly coming apart at the
seams right here at home and that should, of course, be a significant
part of any definition of imperial decline. As it happens, such a
decline of a major global power will always prove anything but a distant
foreign affair.

Even if it's not normally thought about or written about that way, it
is, in fact, happening right here, right now, in these increasingly
dis-United States of America in a distinctly up close and personal
fashion. At this point, you can, in fact, see evidence of it almost any
time you turn on the news. In some sense, it couldn't be more graphic or
literal. After all, former president Donald Trump, once again running
for president, is, symbolically speaking, declining before our very eyes
as he rants and verbally stumbles in a [distinctly declinist
fashion](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/06/us/politics/trump-speeches-age-cognitive-decline.html),
even if to the cheers of striking numbers of his MAGA fans and
followers. (By the way, in light of recent history, isn't it perhaps
time to redefine MAGA as Make America Grotesque Again?)

And yes, in these years of imperial decline, Donald Trump has gotten
(whether positively or negatively) almost unprecedented attention here
at home. Sometimes, in fact, it seems as if he (and he alone) *is* the
news. But here's the truly strange thing: he, the MAGA movement, and
Election 2024 are seldom seen for what (at least in part) they really
are. He, that MAGA phenomenon, and the 20 million --- yes, 20 million!
--- military-style AR-15 automatic rifles (the [best-selling rifle in
America](https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/interactive/2023/american-ar-15-gun-owners/))
now in private hands --- mainly the mitts of those who are White, male,
between the ages of 40 and 65, and have accompanied him into this
version of America --- actually represent the truest sign of imperial
decline imaginable in the place its leaders still like to think of as
the greatest on Planet Earth.

Yes, Donald Trump is living, breathing evidence that this country is
none too slowly coming apart at the seams. I mean, when in our history
could you count on the fact that, if one candidate for president loses
the upcoming election, he (and yes, it distinctly is a *he*) will
undoubtedly claim that it's been stolen from him and that he actually
won? And his followers, significant numbers of them armed to the teeth,
will agree with him and do who knows what (but nothing good). And of
course, were he instead to win, four years later you can count on one
thing: in some sense, this country is likely to be politically
unrecognizable. If you don't believe me, just check out the Heritage
Foundation's [Project 2025](https://tomdispatch.com/project-2025/) to
get a sense of the direction that a whole crew of his former officials
and other Trumpian types think it should head. In other words, the
United States is not just going down as a global power but potentially,
in some fashion, beginning to disintegrate domestically as well, even
possibly as a democracy. And if that isn't both the functional and the
literal definition of "decline," what is?

Let me just say that, if I could bring my parents back from the (long)
dead and tell them the fantastic story of Donald Trump and how he became
president or, for that matter, how the Supreme Court, led by six
right-wing (including three Trump-appointed) justices, essentially
immunized a significant range of his illegal acts in office by [granting
him](https://www.laprogressive.com/law-and-justice/second-coming-of-dred-scott)
"presumptive immunity" for them, I guarantee you they wouldn't have
believed such a thing possible. Nor would they have believed that a
"businessman," without the slightest political background, who survived
multiple (and I do mean
[multiple](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2016/live-updates/general-election/real-time-fact-checking-and-analysis-of-the-first-presidential-debate/fact-check-has-trump-declared-bankruptcy-four-or-six-times/))
bankruptcies and was best known for hosting a reality (or perhaps
irreality) TV show, [*The
Apprentice*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Apprentice_(American_TV_series)),
for 14 seasons that tested the supposed business skills of its
contestants, could become president of the United States.

Trump's very victory in 2016 should, in other words, have instantly been
seen as the functional definition of American imperial decline --- a
crucial sign of the weakening and potential collapse of this country's
position in the world translated into domestic politics. And an election
victory this November could, in the end, mean both the figurative and
literal bankruptcy of the American system, while his defeat, in a nation
now armed to the teeth, could give chaos a new name in the imperial
homeland.

In other words, whether Donald Trump wins or loses Election 2024, this
country is in trouble deep and, four years from now, its situation could
be almost unimaginable. It could be run by a degenerating 82-year-old
madman or, even with Kamala Harris in the White House, a country in an
ever more deeply divided and increasingly violent state of mind. It will
not be, as it proudly proclaimed itself once upon a distant time, "the
leader of the free world," nor is it likely to be a fully functional
global superpower (though what chaos or devastating violence its "fall"
could bring the world, including [future
conflicts](https://tomdispatch.com/powder-keg-in-the-pacific/) with
China, remains hard to imagine).

**Chill, Baby, Chill?**

And let's not forget that, in some sense, that may be the least of our
problems. After all, as we've experienced all too recently with
hurricanes
[Helene](https://www.sc.edu/uofsc/posts/2024/10/conversation-hurricane-helene-deadly-disaster-six-states.php)
and
[Milton](https://www.npr.org/sections/the-picture-show/2024/10/10/g-s1-27291/photos-hurricane-milton-slams-florida),
whatever devastation may lie ahead socially and politically for this
country, another kind of devastation is fast becoming a distinct (and
distinctive) part of everyday life, here and in the world at large.
Whether we're talking about increasingly powerful storms or ever more
devastating
[fires](https://www.nature.org/en-us/what-we-do/our-priorities/tackle-climate-change/climate-change-stories/extreme-wildfires-are-getting-worse-with-climate-change/)
and
[floods](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/18/climate/global-flooding-climate-change.html),
we're on a planet that's heading for trouble in a big-time fashion.

The fact is that we all now live on a different Earth, one that's
clearly going to experience devastating weather of every imaginable
sort. Climate change, in other words, is truly our new reality and it's
clear that the devastation has only begun.

As ever more homelands on this planet become ever less livable and ever
greater numbers of us [begin
wandering](https://www.zurich.com/media/magazine/2022/there-could-be-1-2-billion-climate-refugees-by-2050-here-s-what-you-need-to-know)
in search of places to inhabit --- yes, Donald, climate change is indeed
creating a previously inconceivable world of "illegal immigrants"! ---
imagine the once greatest power on planet Earth with a president who
[still
insists](https://democrats.org/news/donald-the-denier-donald-trump-has-repeatedly-called-climate-change-a-hoax/)
that global warming is a "hoax." Imagine a president on this very planet
right now who plans, above all else, to "[drill, baby,
drill](https://www.msnbc.com/rachel-maddow-show/maddowblog/trumps-drill-baby-drill-plan-wrong-answer-right-questions-rcna165805)"
from his first day back in the White House --- and that's in the nation
that's already the world's record producer of
[oil](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61545) and
[natural
gas](https://www.forbes.com/sites/rrapier/2024/07/24/us-grows-its-leads-in-natural-gas-production-and-lng-exports/).

That should, of course, be the definition of creating a dysfunctional
country on an increasingly dysfunctional planet, one where the old
imperial dreams of so many "great powers" will have ever less meaning.

Yes, the Middle East is now in ever greater chaos as the Biden
administration's support for Netanyahu only continues, even as he draws
even more of the region into disastrous conflict, while [hardly
bothering](https://www.nbcnews.com/investigations/israel-not-briefed-us-military-officials-plans-retaliation-iran-rcna174443)
to consult with Washington's top officials. Still, count on one thing:
the chaos you see out there now is, in its own eerie fashion, already
coming home to roost and if Donald Trump ends up back in the White
House, believe me, we'll need another term entirely than "lone
superpower" to describe this country.

Might the planet's "great stupid power" work?

And mind you, despite the rise of China, it still remains an open
question, whether there can be another lone superpower of any sort or
even a truly great power on a planet all too literally going to hell in
a (flaming) handbasket, one whose land surface and ocean temperatures
have already hit [record
levels](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2024/oct/08/earths-vital-signs-show-humanitys-future-in-balance-say-climate-experts)
with far worse to come.

You might almost imagine that climate change had grasped the withering
global power of the United States and decided to act accordingly. In
some fashion, we now seem to be on a post-imperial planet in which ---
if only --- the best approach would be: chill, baby, chill.

Copyright 2024 Tom Engelhardt

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[*TomDispatch.com*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He is also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [*The
End of Victory
Culture*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://www.tomdispatch.com/) for where this
article originally appeared.

