# Exile's End

![](exiles-end-3-1.png){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Episode 3

![Agnes (on my right) beautiful and intelligent, was my first girlfriend. Being a true Catholic virgin, it was a chaste relationship. We were about 18. This could have been in Coney Island.](exiles-end-3-2.png){class="a"}

#### General Cover Underwriters

I roved around for a while in Brooklyn, had a couple of jobs delivering
newspapers (The Brooklyn Eagle) and meat and vegetables (Abe & Ben\'s
Kosher Market), but finally decided I should get more serious, so looked
up the help wanted ads in the newspapers. An employment agency sent me
to an insurance company to apply for a job as "assistant underwriter."
Besides not knowing anything about insurance, I didn\'t even know what
an "underwriter" is, except that it sounds like underwater. I asked the
employment agency guy, but he didn\'t know either. He told me not to
worry about it, that the General Cover company was desperate for a young
white All-American male, relatively intelligent, with a high school
education, no experience necessary, assistant underwriter trainee, and I
filled the bill, at least according to him. "They\'ll tell you what an
underwriter is, and you can tell me."

General Cover Underwriters occupied a whole floor in a skyscraper on
Wall Street. I was interviewed first by a vice- president, then by a
supervisor named George Fellows, who asked me three easy questions and
told me I was hired, starting immediately. He turned me over to Bob, who
shook hands and sat me, almost physically, at "my" desk, complete with
swivel chair, blotter, telephone and a device I couldn\'t identify. It
turned out to be a voice recorder that I used to write letters. Once a
few letters were recorded, I ejected the recording and carried it down
to the other end of the floor to the typing pool occupied by a dozen or
so women, mostly young, because female ambition those days seldom
amounted to more than getting married and staying home to mind the
children.

George was supervisor of the New York City and Kentucky regions. What,
you may ask, does NYC have to do with Kentucky? Nothing directly, but
they were the two most lucrative insurance regions --- New York because
it was the center of the universe and Kentucky because it was the center
and the periphery of the whiskey industry. (Whiskey warehouses were
highly inflammable.) I had the fourth desk from George\'s glass office
in a horizontal row. In front of me were twelve horizontal rows of backs
of heads. Each row was responsible for one or more regions of the
country. We, however, were the most important ones. My future career and
life were clear: in about ten years I\'d be a full underwriter. (To
underwrite something is to guarantee that an insurance policy will pay
in case of accident or death, ergo an insurance company. So, an
underwriter is someone who advises the insurance company that it\'s
worth the risk or not, my own definition.) Meanwhile I would get
married, have kids, thus be stuck in the boring life I\'d just stepped
into. Heavy drinking with the boys (colleagues), affairs with typing
pool girls, etc. A Choice was necessary.

The Army

The Korean War was fought between North Korea and South Korea from 1950
to 1953. The war began on 25 June 1950 when North Korea invaded South
Korea following clashes along the border and rebellions in South Korea.
North Korea was supported by China and the Soviet Union while South
Korea was supported by the United States and allied countries. The
fighting ended with an armistice on 27 July 1953.

A military "draft," a.k.a. conscription, was in effect in the United
States and I was a prime subject to soon become a draftee --- eighteen
years old with no responsibilities except myself. In fact, I was
expecting the draftee notification at any moment, but it didn\'t come.
So, I decided to make it happen. I knew how, it was called voluntary
conscription, a contradiction in terms if there ever was one. The
difference between it and enlistment as such was that enlistment was for
four years, and conscription, voluntary or forced, was for eighteen
months. My choice was to go for it. One of the luckiest choices I ever
made.

Please don\'t think the choice was due to misguided patriotism, I don\'t
think so anyway. The excuse I made to myself was that I was tired of
waiting. But in reality, it involved a small dose of existential angst.
What I was tired of was a feeling that my life was being wasted on a
boring job and a blurred future. The loss of a girlfriend may have had
something to do with it as well. I was "going steady" with Patricia, a
pretty Catholic girl (weren\'t they all?) who didn\'t dare to "go all
the way" (didn\'t they all?). Those days the only way to get there was
by marriage.

One day I went unannounced to her home, a few blocks from my own in
Brooklyn, for some reason I don\'t recall. It must have been a weekend.
I rang the bell and after a short wait Patricia herself answered with
swollen eyes, puffy cheeks, messy hair, dressed in wrinkled, unsightly
pajamas. When she saw it was me, she gasped, stepped back and slammed
the door. She phoned me a few hours later and explained that she had a
bad cold and would be unavailable for a few days. When she did reappear,
she was indeed rejuvenated and as pretty as before. Nevertheless, it had
been a devastating revelation for me that she, a nearly angelic being,
could actually be subject to colds and a runny nose and, God forbid,
constipation. Our "steady going" ended wordlessly.

It may well be that my real motivation was simply boredom with life as I
was living it, or (don\'t throw your computer at the wall) --- karma.
All I had to do was go to the draft board, somewhere downtown, and sign
something. Much to my disappointment nobody there seemed particularly
interested in my voluntary conscription. Nobody even asked why. A week
later I received a letter in the mail instructing me to report somewhere
(downtown again, but not the same place) for induction in the U.S. Army.
I said goodbye to my weeping mom and my stern-faced dad and simply left
with the clothes on my back and the few things the letter allowed me to
take. I was there almost all day on lines waiting for a physical
examination, and what turned out to be an all-important IQ test.

Finally, I was standing on my last line of the day, waiting to board a
bus taking us somewhere --- hopefully not directly to Korea. I glanced
across the street and was surprised, almost shocked to see my father
standing there watching. He wore his usual gray suit with tie and vest
and fedora hat. I broke ranks --- well, not exactly a "rank" --- and
crossed the street to him. We didn\'t embrace. C\'mon, that was New York
in the early nineteen-fifties. Men didn\'t embrace. We shook hands. He
mumbled something about good luck, I guess, I don\'t really remember.
But I do remember that I was moved by his gesture of just showing up
there, I mean he wasn\'t that kind of guy. And he was the only one!
Someone whistled for me, and I ran back and boarded the bus. I waved to
my dad as we pulled out. "Anyone know where we\'re going?" someone
called out. "Maybe it\'s a secret," someone else said.

To be continued...
