# Anthroposophical Guidelines

![](guidelines.jpg){class="a"}

## by Rudolf Steiner

On Understanding Spirit and Experiencing Destiny

To the communications and considerations which are imparted to the
members, I would like now to add something which can be appropriate for
enhanced understanding of the Guidelines.

Understanding of anthroposophical knowledge can be enhanced when the
human soul is continually reminded of the relation between man and
world.

When a person directs his attention to the world in which he is born and
dies, he is initially surrounded by a plenitude of sense impressions. He
thinks about these sense impressions.

When he is conscious of the following: "I have thoughts about what my
senses reveal to me about the world", he is ready for self-knowledge. He
can say to himself: "I" live in my thoughts. The world gives me the
opportunity to experience *myself* in thought. I find myself in my
thoughts when I contemplate the world.

Continuing in this contemplation of the world, he removes the world from
consciousness; and the I enters into it. He ceases to think of the
world; he begins to experience the self. When, conversely, he brings his
attention to his inner life in which the world is mirrored, the events
of his life related to destiny emerge in which the human self
participates -- from the point in time he can remember. He experiences
his own being in the sequence of this destiny-experience.

To the extent one is conscious of this: "I have lived a destiny with my
Self", he can introduce contemplation of the world. He can say to
himself: "I was not alone in my destiny; the world intervened in my
experience. I *wanted* this or that; the world flowed into my will. I
find the world in my will in that I experience this will in
self-contemplation.

Thus living into his self, this self departs from consciousness and the
world enters. He ceases to experience the self; he begins to be aware of
the world with his feelings.

I extend thinking out into the world; I find myself there; I submerge in
my self, I find the world there. When one senses *this* strongly enough,
he stands within the riddles of world and human existence.

Then to feel: "I struggle to grasp the world by thinking, but it is
merely me trapped in this thinking" -- which reveals the first
world-riddle.

To feel in his self that he has been formed by destiny and in this
forming to sense the world's happenings; this points him to the second
world-riddle.

By experiencing this riddle of world and man, a state of mind germinates
in which one can encounter Anthroposophy in such a way that he receives
an impression within that awakens his interest.

For anthroposophy maintains the following: A spiritual experience exists
which does not ignore the world in thinking. One can also still *live*
in thinking. It provides an inner experience in meditation in which one
does not lose the sense-world, but wins the spirit-world. Instead of
penetrating in the I in a way which makes one feel that the sense-world
is disappearing, one penetrates into the spirit-world in which one feels
the I strengthened.

Furthermore Anthroposophy indicates: An experience of destiny exists in
which one does not lose the self. In his destiny, one can also realize
one's self as *active. *In the un-egoistical contemplation of human
destiny, Anthroposophy provides the experience by which one does not
only learn to love one's own existence, but also the world. Instead of
staring at the world which carries the I on waves of happiness and
despair, one finds the I that designs its own destiny through willing.
Instead of ramming against the world by which the I is shattered, he
pushes through to his Self and feels united with world events.

Man's destiny is prepared by the world which his senses reveal. If he
finds his own activity in the events of destiny, his self does not only
arise from his own inner being, but also from the sense-world.

If one can even vaguely feel how the world appears as spiritual in the
self and how in the sense-world the self proves to be active, one is
already on a sure path to understanding Anthroposophy.

For then he will develop awareness that the spirit-world may be
described by Anthroposophy, which is then grasped by the self. And this
awareness will also develop an understanding for the fact that in the
sense-world the self can be found in a different way than that of
sinking into one's interior. Anthroposophy finds the self by showing how
not only sense perceptions are revealed by the sense-world, but also the
consequences of previous existence and previous earth-lives.

One can gaze out into the sense world and say: "Here is not only color,
sound, warmth; here the soul's experiences work which this soul has
lived through during its present earthly existence." And he can look
into himself and say: "Here is not only my I; here a spiritual world
reveals itself."

By means of such understanding the person touched by the World-Man
riddle can find himself together with an initiate who, according to his
insights, speaks of the outer sense-world as where not only sense
perceptions are made manifest, but also the impressions about what human
souls have done in their previous existence and previous earth lives;
and who must describe the inner Self-World as revealing spiritual
relationships which are as extraordinary and effective as those of the
sense-world.

The members who wish to be active should consciously synchronize what
the questioning human soul feels as the World-Man riddle with what
initiate knowledge has to say when it reveals a bygone world, and when
it provides a perception of a spirit-world through the strengthening of
the soul.

By working in this way, the members who wish to be active can make the
Anthroposophical Society into a true pre-school of the initiates'
school. The Christmas Conference wished to forcefully indicate this; and
whoever correctly understands that Conference will continue to carry out
this indication until a sufficient understanding can again give the
Society new tasks.

The following Guidelines refer to this indication.

62\. Sense perception reveals only a superficial part of the being which
the sense world hides under the waves of its depths. Through vivid
spiritual observation of these depths, the effects of human souls'
actions in long bygone times are revealed.

63\. The human inner-world reveals to ordinary self-observation only a
part of the realm in which it stands. Through strengthened observation
it shows that it exists within a living spiritual reality.

64\. In man's destiny not only the activities of an external world are
manifest, but also those of his Self.

65\. In human soul-experiences not merely a self is manifest, but also a
spirit-world. The self, through spiritualized cognition, is able to
recognize that world's solidarity with its own being.

66\. The beings of the third hierarchy manifest themselves as the
spiritual background to the life which emerges in human thinking. This
life is hidden in human thinking activity. If it continued being active
as itself, humanity could not attain to freedom. Human thinking begins
where cosmic thinking ends.

67\. The beings of the second hierarchy manifest themselves as a psychic
element which is beyond humanity. Being of a cosmic-psychic nature, it
is hidden from human sensibility. This cosmic-psychic nature acts in the
background of human feeling. It transforms the human essence into a
feeling organism in order that feeling can live in it.

68\. The beings of the first hierarchy manifest themselves in a
spiritual creativity which is beyond humanity. As a cosmic-spiritual
world of being, it indwells the human will. These cosmic-spiritual
beings experience themselves as creative in that man wills. They form
the connection between the human being and the external-to-humanity
world in order that man may become a free, volitional being.

To be continued.

[Guidelines 38 to 61](https://southerncrossreview.org/159/guidelines-38-61.html)

This book may be purchased from [Barnes & Noble](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/anthroposophical-guidelines-rudolf-steiner/1142250459?ean=9781948302418) and [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Anthroposophical-Guidelines-Rudolf-Steiner/dp/1948302411).
