# The Magic Mound

![](magic-mound-cover.png){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 17

### Mireya

They waited until the star appeared at twilight and set out down the
hill and back into the forest, where it was already dark. There was a
sliver of moon in the sky now, but it provided little light. The forest
was very different at night than it was during the day and not only
because they could hardly see. Many animals awoke at night and made
scary noises. Branches and leaves slapped at them and they tripped over
unseen roots. Sergio was beginning to doubt the wisdom of traveling at
night when an owl alighted on Platero\'s back. The donkey stood stock
still, shook his head and stamped his hooves. The boys stopped and
turned to see what was disturbing him. The owl glared at them with its
bright yellow eyes, flapped its wings, screeched and flew off over their
heads. Then it banked in a sharp right turn and disappeared from view.

\"What was that?\" Divino asked, terrified.

\"It was only an owl,\" Sergio answered. He had also been frightened,
but only until the owl flew off.

\"I don\'t like the forest much at night, Sergio.\"

\"No, it\'s hard traveling at night. Maybe we should stay here and go on
in the morning.\"

Platero brayed his agreement.

But the owl did not agree. He suddenly flew back at them and landed on
Sergio\'s right shoulder. He boy was startled but didn\'t dare move. The
owl screeched in his ear and flew off, turned right and screeched again
when he was out of sight.

\"I think he wants us to follow him,\" Sergio said.

They went to where the owl had turned and saw his yellow eyes shining
from a low limb a few yards away. They followed and he flew off again.
The next time they saw him he was perched on a branch over a small
clearing. He flew on again through the forest as the boys approached.

They continued in this way all night until, at sunrise, they came upon
the owl perched on a higher branch with its eyes closed.

\"It\'s asleep,\" Divino said.

\"Yes, and it\'s a good idea.\" They lay down under the tree and were
asleep almost before their heads touched the ground. Platero took the
hint, closed his eyes and slept standing between them.

When night fell the owl circled over them and they waved, meaning that
they would follow him. During the third night, after they had been
walking several hours, they came upon a clearing on which stood several
simple but well made wooden houses. The clearing had been turned into a
garden with a long table and some chairs. The inhabitants of the houses
were obviously asleep, for no sound came from the settlement.

\"Is this where Alaram and Mireya are?,\" Divino asked.

\"I think so.\"

\"What are we going to do now, Sergio?\"

\"We better rest here until it\'s light.\" They went back a way into the
forest and settled down to rest. They were wakened some hours later by
voices coming from the clearing. They crept closer and saw two men
wearing kilts made of tararobe material disappear into the other side of
the forest. The boys didn\'t dare move and silence reigned for several
minutes. Suddenly a girl\'s laugh startled them. Platero brayed and
Sergio put his hand over the donkeys mouth. \"Hush, Platero. Do you want
them to catch us after all we\'ve gone through?\" he whispered.

\"Look, Sergio.\" A young girl about Sergio\'s age had run out of one of
the houses and was standing in the garden looking around her. Suddenly
she called out: \"Platero?\"

Platero shook off Sergio\'s hand and trotted out of the forest and
straight up to the girl. When she saw him she opened her arms and cried,
\"Platero, it\'s you!\" The donkey halted in front of her and nudged her
with his head, knocking her down. She jumped up immediately and threw
her arms around his neck. A dozen men emerged from the houses and stared
in astonishment. One of the men went up to them and patted Platero on
his head. \"How did you get here, Platero?\" he asked. The donkey nudged
the man and trotted back to where the boys were crouching in the forest.

\"Go away, Platero,\" Sergio urged, but the girl ran behind Platero and
spotted them. She walked right up to them.

\"Hello,\" she said, \"Who are you and why are you hiding?\"

\"Are you Mireya?\" Sergio whispered.

\"Yes, I am, but who are you?\"

\"Sergio dos Santos and this is my brother, Divino. We\'re from Brazil
and we\'ve come to rescue you.\"

She smiled and clapped her hands. \"Oh, that\'s wonderful, I\'m from
Brazil too. But why do you want to rescue me?\" She laughed. \"From
what?\"

\"From Alaram.\" Sergio looked through her legs and saw men approaching.
\"They\'ll see us if you stand here chatting. Go back to your house and
we\'ll rescue you tonight.\" Mireya didn\'t move, she just stared at
them, seemingly amused. \"Please,\" Sergio whispered urgently. But it
was too late. The man who had spoken to Platero, followed by another,
was already standing beside Mireya. Sergio considered running away but
when he looked behind he saw the two men they had seen entering the
forest from the other side approaching behind them. So he stood up and
stepped into the clearing, followed by Divino.

\"Hello,\" the first man said, \"I am Alaram. Are you Mireya\'s friends?
Please come inside and have something to eat and drink.\"

\"We\'re going to rescue her,\" Divino blurted out, and Sergio cringed.

The smile faded from Alaram\'s face. \"I see. Well, come in anyway.
You\'ll be more comfortable rescuing her on a full stomach.\"

He turned on his heel and walked toward one of the houses. The other
man, who had not introduced himself, walked at his side. The two were of
the same height, that is, short, as all Maxanians seemed to be, but
Alaram was slimmer and handsomer than his companion. His straight black
hair reached to his shoulders. The other man had short reddish hair and
a fearsome scar divided his face from forehead to chin. Mireya took the
boys\' hands and led them to Alaram\'s house in much the same way Mara
had led them from the magic mound to the palace at Maxnatara. Platero
followed them.

\"Don\'t be afraid,\" she assured them, \"Alaram is a good man and a
friend.\"

The boys were exceedingly surprised to hear Mireya describe Alaram this
way. They had imagined that he was a bad man and a kidnapper. Sergio
looked at her from the corner of his eye, admiring her profile and her
soft brown skin. Her hair was tightly curled around her head like a
spherical helmet. She sensed Sergio\'s interest and turned to him with a
bright smile.

\"I\'m so happy to see children again. Did you came to Maxa on the
mound?\"

\"Yes, we did...\" Sergio began.

\"The *magic* mound,\" Divino interrupted.

Alaram held aside a grass curtain for them to enter his house. The
scar-faced man prepared food and tea for them and they ate their first
good meal since they had left Maxanatara. No one spoke while they were
eating. When they finished Alaram asked in a firm voice, \"Now what is
all this about rescuing Mireya?\"

Sergio blushed but Divino, as usual, was ready with an answer, though it
may not have been the correct one: \"You kidnapped Mireya and we are
going to rescue her.\"

Alaram laughed. \"And how do you intend to do that, little man?\"

It was Divino\'s turn to blush. \"I don\'t know yet,\" he stammered,
\"but Sergio will think of something.

\"But Divino,\" Mireya said, \"Alaram didn\'t kidnap me. Whoever told
you that?\"

\"Queen Mamara.\"

\"Yes, now I see,\" Alaram mumbled.

\"But why would Mamara tell us that Alaram kidnapped you,\" Sergio said
to Mireya, \"and send us all the way here to rescue you if you hadn\'t
been kidnapped at all?\"

\"Maybe Mamara just thinks she was kidnapped,\" Divino offered.

No one said anything for a few moments, then the man with the scar said
gruffly, \"Mamara lies.\"

Alaram looked at him, then at the boys. \"You can be sure that I did not
bring Mireya here against her will. Isn\'t that right, Mireya?\"

\"Of course. I wanted to come with Alaram.\" She seemed angry. \"I
suspect that Alto is right.\"

\"Certainly I am right,\" the scar-faced one said. \"She always lies.\"

\"No,\" Alaram said, \"she never used to lie before. It\'s only
since\...Tell us, Sergio, What did she say?\"

Sergio told them Mamara\'s version of things and was embarrassed as he
did so because he now knew they were not true.

\"If Mireya wants to return to Mamara she is free to go at any time,\"
Alaram affirmed.

Mireya put her hand on Alaram\'s arm. \"Alaram would never think of
kidnapping me. And the men didn\'t leave for the reason Mamara gave you.
But,\" she looked a Alaram, \"there is something in what she said. You
did treat the women a bit like servants, and just because they are
women.\"

Alaram looked puzzled. \"I never noticed,\" he said. \"In any case the
dispute was about Vidaluz.\"

\"Yes, but the way you treated the women didn\'t help.\"

\"We drank some vidaluz,\" Divino said and yawned. He looked out the
window and saw Platero standing in the shade of a tree with his eyes
closed. They had walked all night and had only slept for an hour before
dawn. Divino had a strong desire to join Platero, but he didn\'t want to
miss anything of what was happening around him.

\"Didn\'t she tell you that vidaluz prevents you from growing older?\"
Mireya asked him.

\"Yes, but I want to get older.\"

\"Well, so do I. That\'s why I left Maxanatara with Alaram and the other
men. Mamara wanted me to drink Vidaluz every month at the full moon so I
would stay a child.\"

\"I don\'t understand,\" Sergio said, and Mireya looked at Alaram for
help.

\"If you drink Vidaluz regularly you will never grow old and never
become ill,\" he explained, \"but you will never have children either.
Alaram looked as though he were about to cry. Instead he slammed his
fist down on the table causing them all, except Alto, to jump. \"Light
tricked us. She did not tell us about that.\" He opened his fist and his
hand trembled on the table.

\"How, Alaram?\" Sergio asked him.

\"When Light first taught my father how to make vidaluz she painted a
wonderful picture of a paradise in Maxanatara: eternal youth, no
sickness, no death, no suffering.\" Alaram\'s face darkened. \"But she
never mentioned that there would be no children.\"

\"Were there children before you started drinking the vidaluz?\"

\"Of course. They wanted to grow up though, so we didn\'t give them the
vidaluz until they were grown men and women. No new children were born
but we were so stupid that we didn\'t associate this with the vidaluz
until there were no children left. We didn\'t know what to do. When I
finally realized what was happening I called for Light to come to me, if
only in a dream, but she did not come. So I went back to Urmaxa to find
her. When I came to the Eastbridge it was completely covered by water
and I couldn\'t get across. As I stood there trying to think of what to
do, a funny little man called to me from the other side of the river and
asked me what was the matter.

\"A little man?\" Sergio interrupted him.

\"Yes, he looked funny, but was very wise.\"

\"It must have been Tamoshot.\"

\"He didn\'t tell me his name. Do you know him?\"

\"Yes, he helped us on our way here,\" Sergio said. \"What did he tell
you?\"

\"He said there were three possibilities.\" Alaram knitted his brow,
thinking. \"The first was that we could go on living as we were, never
dying and never having children. Or we could stop drinking the vidaluz,
in which case we would all die eventually, but there would be children
again.\" He stopped as though finished.

\"And the third possibility?\" Sergio asked.

\"Oh yes, the mound.\"

\"That\'s how we Brazilians got involved,\" Mireya said. \"If it hadn\'t
been for Tamo...what?\"

\"Tamoshot.\"

\"Tamoshot, we wouldn\'t be here.\"

Alaram smiled at her and continued. \"He said I could make a mound on
which some children would come to Maxa. He told me how to make it:
perfectly round, surrounded by a circle of stones and three almond
branches buried in it. They cause sleepiness. It is very important that
someone go to the mound every day to see if any children are on it, for
if they are not woken up they might sleep on until they die of thirst
and hunger.\"

\"Mara woke us up,\" Divino said.

Alaram was so absorbed in his story that he didn\'t hear him. \"When I
returned to the palace I told Mamara the three possibilities, but she
wanted to know why we couldn\'t keep on drinking vidaluz and have
children as well. I told her that it was impossible and she asked why. I
didn\'t know and I still don\'t know. I could not accept the first
alternative and Mamara could not accept the second, so we decided in
favor of the mound. But the only children who came, Mireya and now you
two, all want to grow up.\" Alaram looked at the floor sadly.

\"What happened then?\" Divino asked and yawned again.

\"We quarreled. Mamara wanted Mireya to drink the vidaluz every month,
but she refused. One day I lost my temper and threatened to leave. She
said I should do so, but to tell her the vidaluz formula first. The men
all sided with me and the women with Mamara, except Mireya of course. So
we left.

\"Mamara knows the formula now. Did you tell her?\" Sergio asked.

\"Yes, in a dream,\" Alaram answered, as though it were the most natural
thing in the world to tell others things in dreams. Sergio was relieved
that Mamara had told the truth about that.

There was silence for a while, until Mireya asked, \"What do you think
about it, Sergio?\"

Sergio was proud that Mireya wanted his opinion, and the others were
looking at him as well. \"Actually, I\'ve been thinking about it and it
seems to me that it\'s logical that if you never get old and die you
can\'t have children.\"

\"Why?\" Alaram demanded.

\"You don\'t need them. In fact, if children were always being born and
nobody died, Maxa would be so crowded that there wouldn\'t be enough
room for everyone.\"

Alaram stood up and paced back and forth across the room several times,
then stopped in front of Sergio. \"You\'re right,\" he said, \"I never
thought of that.\"

Alto said, \"The women don\'t want to get old because they are afraid of
the wrinkles that make them look like prunes. We men don\'t care about
that.\"

\"I don\'t believe that, Alto,\" Mireya said. \"Men are just as vain as
women.\"

\"We are also as afraid to die as they are,\" Alaram said.

\"But you wanted to stop taking the vidaluz in order to have children
again,\" Mireya reminded him.

\"That\'s right, Alaram,\" Alto insisted. \"We are not afraid.\"

Alaram sighed. \"Perhaps you are not, Alto, and I envy you that, but
when I think about death I am afraid. Perhaps you have not thought about
it enough.\"

\"Maybe it\'s better not to think about it at all,\" Alto answered
gloomily.

Alaram said to the children, \"I wanted to stop taking the vidaluz
because I found life sad and incomplete without little children running
about playing, laughing and crying. What good is eternal life if such an
essential part is missing? I was bored, and now it is worse, for I have
neither children nor women.\"

\"So much the better,\" Alto mumbled.

Alaram smiled. \"I see that I shall have to stop thinking in order to be
satisfied like you, Alto.\"

\"I am satisfied to serve my king,\" Alto said and bowed his head.

\"I have tried to stop thinking,\" Alaram said, \"but it is hard.\"

\"You must try harder.\"

Divino suddenly butted in: \"It\'s not bad to die.\"

Alaram patted him gently on the head. \"Children do not worry about such
things.\"

\"But Dona Ute said so!\" Divino persisted.

\"And who is Don Ute?\"

\"Our teacher. She worries a lot, but not about dying. She says people
shouldn\'t waste their time worrying about that.\"

\"You have a good teacher,\" Alto said.

\"Yes,\" Alaram agreed, \"it is no use worrying about something you
can\'t change. But we have changed it and I worry about it.\"

As Sergio listened to them he tried to put his thoughts in order. He
knew that it would be hard to explain because he had never really
thought about it before. Mireya asked him with her eyes to explain.
Alaram and Alto were looking at him too. Though he was still a child
they felt he knew more about such thing than they. Sergio had the
feeling that all this had something to do with the last line of the
raven\'s verse.

\"Dona Ute doesn\'t mean that we shouldn\'t worry about dying because
there\'s nothing we can do about it,\" he said slowly. \"She means that
death is not the terrible thing most people think it is. It\'s like
going to sleep at night and waking up in the morning, only...\"

\"When someone dies he does not wake up in the morning,\" Alaram
interrupted.

\"Not the next morning, but sometime. Dona Ute says that we are born
again later, I don\'t know how much later, maybe a hundred years.\"

\"As a woman,\" Divino put in.

\"Men are born as women the next time, and women as men,\" Sergio
confirmed. \"And we have all lived before, many times. So you see, dying
is not a bad thing, it\'s only a kind of rest in heaven before starting
again with more knowledge and experience.\"

\"Maybe that\'s how it is in Brazil,\" Alto said, \"but here in Maxa we
only live once, or we\'d remember having lived before.\"

\"We don\'t remember either,\" Sergio said, \"except maybe some of us.\"

\"Like Dona Uta?\" Alaram asked.

Sergio had never asked Dona Ute that, he had simply accepted everything
she told them. \"I don\'t know if she remembers,\" he admitted.

\"Then how does she know?\" Alto asked.

\"I didn\'t say she doesn\'t remember, I said I didn\'t know, I never
asked her. But she knows.\"

\"I am sure that she does,\" Alaram said. \"Probably her God told her.
Isn\'t that right, Sergio?

Sergio hesitated. \"I suppose so,\" he said, \"I never asked her but I
suppose that\'s how she knows.\"

No one spoke for a while. Then Sergio asked Alaram, \"Did something ever
happen to you that seemed to have happened before but that you knew
could not have happened?\"

Alaram thought about the question. \"I have lived so long that it is
hard to remember so far back. But wait, yes, when I first saw Mireya I
had the feeling that I knew her, but I could not have known her because
she came from Brazil on the mound.\"

\"You probably knew her in a previous life,\" Sergio explained. \"How
about you, Mireya?\"

\"I often have the feeling that I know people from before, but I never
know why. Now I see that it must be as you say, Sergio.\"

\"Do you see what this means for you and the rest of the men, Alaram?\"
Sergio said.

Alaram\'s brow wrinkled. \"No, I don\'t\"

Mireya clapped her hands. \"I do,\" she exclaimed. \"You can go back
now.\"

\"Go back? To Maxanatara?\"

\"Of course. Once you understand that to die is not what it seems and
that you will be born again, you can accept death without worrying about
it. You can stop taking the vidaluz and there will be children again.\"

Alaram\'s eyes lighted up and he smiled broadly.

\"Your own children,\" Mireya added, \"so you won\'t need us.\"

Alaram\'s face lit up in a beaming smile. \"Yes, I understand now.\" He
stood up and danced around the room and the others clapped, all except
Alto.

\"Will Mamara agree to grow old?\" he asked.

Alaram stopped dancing and frowned. \"I don\'t know.\"

\"The women in Maxanatara must miss you men very much,\" Mireya said,
\"and Mamara must be especially lonely for you, Alaram. She loves you, I
know she does.\"

\"She did once,\" Alaram replied sadly, \"But I doubt that she still
does. So many bad things have happened and so many ugly words have been
spoken.\"

\"That will be forgotten, you\'ll see.\" She turned to Alto. \"And
don\'t you miss your beautiful wife, Aruka?\"

Alto cracked his knuckles. \"She\'s not beautiful,\" he said, \"but
neither am I.\"

Mireya laughed. \"You are both beautiful.\" She kissed Alto on the
forehead, which made him blush.

\"When do we leave?\" he asked.

\"I hope the women are as easy to convince as you,\" Alaram said
mockingly. \"First we will have to explain everything to the men and if
they agree, which I think they will, we can leave tomorrow.\"

\"It won\'t be easy going through Urmaxa,\" Sergio said. \"Arman must be
very angry that we got here without being caught.\"

\"You came through Urmaxa?\" Alaram exclaimed.

\"Of course. How else could we get here?\"

\"You are lucky to be alive. In fact, it\'s a miracle.\"

\"But why are you so surprised?\" Sergio asked him. \"Is there another
way of getting here? We came through Urmaxa because Mamara told us it
was the only way to get here.\"

\"There is another way,\" Alaram said, \"but Mamara had no way of
knowing about it. You see, when we arrived at the Eastbridge, I decided
it would be too dangerous to travel through Urmaxa under Arman\'s nose
with so many people, because it would be impossible to hide. Then I
thought that if my father could build such a bridge all by himself I
should be able to find a way to cross the Riovita farther south. So we
turned away from Urmaxa and followed the river until we reached its
narrowest point.\"

Alaram smiled and said with pride in his voice, \"There we cut down some
trees, tied their trunks together and floated across the river.\"

\"A raft,\" Sergio said. \"Yes, that would be the obvious way to get
across if you have the tools and know how to build one.\"

\"It may seem obvious to you,\" Alaram explained, \"but to us the idea
of a raft, as you call it, was an inspiration because we had never seen
such a thing.\"

\"It really was very clever of you,\" Sergio agreed. \"You invented the
raft all over again.\"

\"Are there many rafts in Brazil?\" Alto asked.

\"In don\'t think so,\" Sergio replied, \"there are many ships though,
and even submarines.\"

\"We know about rafts because Dona Ute read us a book once, *The
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*,\" Divino said. \"This boy Huck and his
friend Jim float down the longest river in America, the Mississippi, on
a raft...\"

Sergio broke in before Divino could start to tell the whole story of
Huckleberry Finn: \"Do you still have the raft?\"

\"Yes, we banked and tied it on this side of the river,\" Alaram said.
\"It took us a week to build and we were almost killed crossing the
river, so we weren\'t about to lose it.\"

\"And how did you cross the chasm?\"

\"What chasm?\" Alaram asked and Sergio described it to him.

\"The god must have caused the earth to split after we arrived,\" Alaram
said. \"I suppose he was angry with us.\"

\"Do you have tararobes?\" Sergio asked.

\"Of course not,\" Alto said scornfully, \"they are for women. We wear
tarakilts.\"

Sergio examined the kilts and nodded. \"If it comes to that they\'ll
have to do.\"

\"What do you mean?\" Alaram asked him.

\"It\'s too complicated,\" Sergio said, not wanting to frighten them.
\"I\'ll tell you later if we have to cross the chasm.\"

Alaram and Alto seemed satisfied with this answer, but Mireya resolved
to find out what Sergio meant when she got the chance.

[Chapter 16](https://southerncrossreview.org/159/magic-mound-16.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle:

[The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)

and in Spanish at:

[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)

