# The Queen of Spades

![](queen-of-spades-1-2.jpg){class="a"}

## By Alexander Pushkin

### CHAPTER III.

Lisaveta was just taking off her shawl and her bonnet, when the Countess
sent for her. She had had the horses put in again.

While two footmen were helping the old lady into the carriage, Lisaveta
saw the young officer at her side. She felt him take her by the hand,
lost her head, and found, when the young officer had walked away, that
he had left a paper between her fingers. She hastily concealed it in her
glove.

During the whole of the drive she neither saw nor heard. When they were
in the carriage together the Countess was in the habit of questioning
Lisaveta perpetually.

\"Who is that man that bowed to us? What is the name of this bridge?
What is there written on that signboard?\"

Lisaveta now gave the most absurd answers, and was accordingly scolded
by the Countess.

\"What is the matter with you, my child?\" she asked. \"What are you
thinking about? Or do you really not hear me? I speak distinctly enough,
however, and I have not yet lost my head, have I?\"

Lisaveta was not listening. When she got back to the house, she ran to
her room, locked the door, and took the scrap of paper from her glove.
It was not sealed, and it was impossible, therefore, not to read it. The
letter contained protestations of love. It was tender, respectful, and
translated word for word from a German novel. But Lisaveta did not read
German, and she was quite delighted. She was, however, much embarrassed.
For the first time in her life she had a secret. Correspond with a young
man! The idea of such a thing frightened her. How imprudent she had
been! She had reproached herself, but knew not now what to do.

Cease to do her work at the window, and by persistent coldness try and
disgust the *young* officer? Send him back his letter? Answer him in a
firm, decided manner? What line of conduct was she to pursue? She had no
friend, no one to advise her. She at last decided to send an answer. She
sat down at her little table, took pen and paper, and began to think.
More than once she wrote a sentence and then tore up the paper. What she
had written seemed too stiff, or else it was wanting in reserve. At
last, after much trouble, she succeeded in composing a few lines which
seemed to meet the case.

\"I believe,\" she wrote, \"that your intentions are those of an
honourable man, and that you would not wish to offend me by any
thoughtless conduct. But you must understand that our acquaintance
cannot begin in this way. I return your letter, and trust that you will
not give me cause to regret my imprudence.\"

Next day, as soon as Hermann made his appearance, Lisaveta left her
embroidery, and went into the drawing-room, opened the ventilator, and
threw her letter into the street, making sure that the young officer
would pick it up.

[]{#anchor} Hermann, in fact, at once saw it, and picking it up, entered
a confectioner\'s shop in order to read it. Finding nothing discouraging
in it, he went home sufficiently pleased with the first step in his love
adventure.

Some days afterwards, a young person with lively eyes called to see Miss
Lisaveta, on the part of a milliner. Lisaveta wondered what she could
want, and suspected, as she received her, some secret intention. She was
much surprised, however, when she recognised, on the letter that was now
handed to her, the writing of Hermann.

\"You make a mistake,\" she said; \"this letter is not for me.\"

\"I beg your pardon,\" said the milliner, with a slight smile; \"be kind
enough to read it.\"

Lisaveta glanced at it. Hermann was asking for an appointment.

\"Impossible!\" she cried, alarmed both at the boldness of the request,
and at the manner in which it was made. \"This letter is not for me,\"
she repeated; and she tore it into a hundred pieces.

\"If the letter was not for you, why did you tear it up? You should have
given it me back, that I might take it to the person it was meant for.\"

\"True,\" said Lisaveta, quite disconcerted.

\"But bring me no more letters, and tell the person who gave you this
one that he ought to blush for his conduct.\"

Hermann, however, was not a man to give up what he had once undertaken.
Every day Lisaveta received a fresh letter from him, sent now in one
way, now in another. They were no longer translated from the German.
Hermann wrote under the influence of a commanding passion, and spoke a
language which was his own. Lisaveta could not hold out against such
torrents of eloquence. She received the letters, kept them, and at last
answered them. Every day her answers were longer and more affectionate,
until at last she threw out of the window a letter couched as
follows:---

\"This evening there is a ball at the Embassy. The Countess will be
there. We shall remain until two in the morning. You may manage to see
me alone. As soon as the Countess leaves home, that is to say towards
eleven o\'clock, the servants are sure to go out, and there will be no
one left but the porter, who will be sure to be asleep in his box. Enter
as soon as it strikes eleven, and go upstairs as fast as possible. If
you find anyone in the ante-chamber, ask whether the Countess is at
home, and you will be told that she is out, and, in that case, you must
resign yourself, and go away. In all probability, however, you will meet
no one. The Countess\'s women are together in a distant room. When you
are once in the ante-chamber, turn to the left, and walk straight on,
until you reach the Countess\'s bedroom. There, behind a large screen,
you will see two doors. The one on the right leads to a dark room. The
one on the left leads to a corridor, at the end of which is a little
winding staircase, which leads to my parlour.\"

At, ten o\'clock Hermann was already on duty before the Countess\'s
door. It was a frightful night. The winds had been unloosed, and the
snow was falling in large flakes; the lamps gave an uncertain light; the
streets were deserted; from time to time passed a sledge, drawn by a
wretched hack, on the look-out for a fare. Covered by a thick overcoat,
Hermann felt neither the wind nor the snow. At last the Countesses
carriage drew up. He saw two huge footmen come forward and take beneath
the arms a dilapidated spectre, and place it on the cushions well
wrapped up in an enormous fur cloak. Immediately afterwards, in a cloak
of lighter make, her head crowned with natural flowers, came Lisaveta,
who sprang into the carriage like a dart. The door was closed, and the
carriage rolled on softly over the snow.

The porter closed the street door, and soon the windows of the first
floor became dark. Silence reigned throughout the house. Hermann walked
backwards and forwards; then coming to a lamp he looked at his watch. It
was twenty minutes to eleven. Leaning against the lamp-post, his eyes
fixed on the long hand of his watch, he counted impatiently the minutes
which had yet to pass. At eleven o\'clock precisely Hermann walked up
the steps, pushed open the street door, and went into the vestibule,
which was well lighted. As it happened the porter was not there. With a
firm and rapid step he rushed up the staircase and reached the
ante-chamber. There, before a lamp, a footman was sleeping, stretched
out in a dirty greasy dressing-gown. Hermann passed quickly before him
and crossed the dining-room and the drawing-room, where there was no
light. But the lamp of the ante-chamber helped him to see. At last he
reached the Countess\'s bedroom. Before a screen covered with old icons
(sacred pictures) a golden lamp was burning. Gilt arm-chairs, sofas of
faded colours, furnished with soft cushions, were arranged symmetrically
along the walls, which were hung with China silk. He saw two large
portraits painted by Madame le Brun. One represented a man of forty,
stout and full coloured, dressed in a light green coat, with a
decoration on his breast. The second portrait was that of an elegant
young woman, with an aquiline nose, powdered hair rolled back on the
temples, and with a rose over her ear. Everywhere might be seen
shepherds and shepherdesses in Dresden china, with vases of all shapes,
clocks by Leroy, work-baskets, fans, and all the thousand playthings for
the use of ladies of fashion, discovered in the last century, at the
time of Montgolfier\'s balloons and Mesmer\'s animal magnetism.

Hermann passed behind the screen, which concealed a little iron
bedstead. He saw the two doors; the one on the right leading to the dark
room, the one on the left to the corridor. He opened the latter, saw the
staircase which led to the poor little companion\'s parlour, and then,
closing this door, went into the dark room.

The time passed slowly. Everything was quiet in the house. The
drawing-room clock struck midnight, and again there was silence. Hermann
was standing up, leaning against the stove, in which there was no fire.
He was calm; but his heart beat with quick pulsations, like that of a
man determined to brave all dangers he might have to meet, because he
knows them to be inevitable. He heard one o\'clock strike; then two; and
soon afterwards the distant roll of a carriage. He now, in spite of
himself, experienced some emotion. The carriage approached rapidly and
stopped. There was at once a great noise of servants running about the
staircases, and a confusion of voices. Suddenly the rooms were all lit
up, and the Countess\'s three antiquated maids came at once into the
bed-room. At last appeared the Countess herself.

The walking mummy sank into a large Voltaire arm-chair. Hermann looked
through the crack in the door; he saw Lisaveta pass close to him, and
heard her hurried step as she went up the little winding staircase. For
a moment he felt something like remorse; but it soon passed off, and his
heart was once more of stone.

The Countess began to undress before a looking-glass. Her head-dress of
roses was taken off, and her powdered wig separated from her own hair,
which was very short and quite white. Pins fell in showers around her.
At last she was in her dressing-gown and night cap, and in this costume,
more suitable to her age, was less hideous than before.

Like most old people, the Countess was tormented by sleeplessness. She
had her armchair rolled towards one of the windows, and told her maids
to leave her. The lights were put out, and the room was lighted only by
the lamp which burned before the holy images. The Countess, sallow and
wrinkled, balanced herself gently from right to left. In her dull eyes
could be read an utter absence of thought; and as she moved from side to
side, one might have said that she did so not by any action of the will,
but through some secret mechanism.

Suddenly this death\'s-head assumed a new expression; the lips ceased to
tremble, and the eyes became alive. A strange man had appeared before
the Countess!

It was Hermann.

\"Do not be alarmed, madam,\" said Hermann, in a low voice, but very
distinctly. \"For the love of Heaven, do not be alarmed. I do not wish
to do you the slightest harm; on the contrary, I come to implore a
favour of you.\"

The old woman looked at him in silence, as if she did not understand.
Thinking she was deaf, he leaned towards her ear and repeated what he
had said; but the Countess still remained silent.

\"You can ensure the happiness of my whole life, and without its costing
you a farthing. I know that you can name to me three cards------\"

The Countess now understood what he required.

\"It was a joke,\" she interrupted. \"I swear to you it was only a
joke.\"

\"No, madam,\" replied Hermann in an angry tone. \"Remember Tchaplitzki,
and how you enabled him to win.\"

The Countess was agitated. For a moment her features expressed strong
emotion; but they soon resumed their former dullness.

\"Cannot you name to me,\" said Hermann, \"three winning cards?\"

The Countess remained silent. \"Why keep this secret for your
great-grandchildren,\" he continued. \"They are rich enough without;
they do not know the value of money. Of what profit would your three
cards be to them? They are debauchees. The man who cannot keep his
inheritance will die in want, though he had the science of demons at his
command. I am a steady man. I know the value of money. Your three cards
will not be lost upon me. Come!\"

He stopped tremblingly, awaiting a reply. The Countess did not utter a
word. Hermann went upon his knees.

\"If your heart has ever known the passion of love; if you can remember
its sweet ecstasies; if you have ever been touched by the cry of a
newborn babe; if any human feeling has ever caused your heart to beat, I
entreat you by the love of a husband, a lover, a mother, by all that is
sacred in life, not to reject my prayer. Tell me your secret! Reflect!
You are old; you have not long to live! Remember that the happiness of a
man is in your hands; that not only myself, but my children and my
grandchildren will bless your memory as a saint.\"

The old Countess answered not a word.

Hermann rose, and drew a pistol from his pocket.

\"Hag!\" he exclaimed, \"I will make you speak.\"

At the sight of the pistol the Countess for the second time showed
agitation. Her head shook violently, she stretched out her hands as if
to put the weapon aside. Then suddenly she fell back motionless.

\"Come, don\'t be childish!\" said Hermann. \"I adjure you for the last
time; will you name the three cards?\"

The Countess did not answer. Hermann saw that she was dead!

CHAPTER IV.

Lisaveta was sitting in her room, still in her ball dress, lost in the
deepest meditation. On her return to the house, she had sent away her
maid, and had gone upstairs to her room, trembling at the idea of
finding Hermann there; desiring, indeed, *not* to find him. One glance
showed her that he was not there, and she gave thanks to Providence that
he had missed the appointment. She sat down pensively, without thinking
of taking off her cloak, and allowed to pass through her memory all the
circumstances of the intrigue which had begun such a short time back,
and had already advanced so far. Scarcely three weeks had passed since
she had first seen the young officer from her window, and already she
had written to him, and he had succeeded in inducing her to make an
appointment. She knew his name, and that was all. She had received a
quantity of letters from him, but he had never spoken to her; she did
not know the sound of his voice, and until that evening, strangely
enough, she had never heard him spoken of.

But that very evening Tomski, fancying he had noticed that the young
Princess Pauline, to whom he had been paying assiduous court, was
flirting, contrary to her custom, with another man, had wished to
revenge himself by making a show of indifference. With this noble object
he had invited Lisaveta to take part in an interminable mazurka; but he
teased her immensely about her partiality for Engineer officers, and
pretending all the time to know much more than he really did, hazarded
purely in fun a few guesses which were so happy that Lisaveta thought
her secret must have been discovered.

\"But who tells you all this?\" she said with a smile.

\"A friend of the very officer you know, a most original man.\"

\"And who is this man that is so original?\"

\"His name is Hermann.\"

She answered nothing, but her hands and feet seemed to be of ice.

\"Hermann is a hero of romance,\" continued Tomski. \"He has the profile
of Napoleon, and the soul of Mephistopheles. I believe he has at least
three crimes on his conscience\.... But how pale you are!\"

\"I have a bad headache. But what did this Mr. Hermann tell you? Is not
that his name?\"

\"Hermann is very much displeased with his friend, with the Engineer
officer who has made your acquaintance. He says that in his place he
would behave very differently. But I am quite sure that Hermann himself
has designs upon you. At least, he seems to listen with remarkable
interest to all that his friend tells him about you.\"

\"And where has he seen me?\"

\"Perhaps in church, perhaps in the street; heaven knows where.\"

At this moment three ladies came forward according to the custom of the
mazurka, and asked Tomski to choose between \"forgetfulness and
regret.\"

And the conversation which had so painfully excited the curiosity of
Lisaveta came to an end.

The lady who, in virtue of the infidelities permitted by the mazurka,
had just been chosen by Tomski, was the Princess Pauline. During the
rapid revolutions which the figure obliged them to make, there was a
grand explanation between them, until at last he conducted her to a
chair, and returned to his partner.

But Tomski could now think no more, either of Hermann or Lisaveta, and
he tried in vain to resume the conversation. But the mazurka was coming
to an end, and immediately afterwards was when the old Countess rose to
go.

Tomski\'s mysterious phrases were nothing more than the usual platitudes
of the mazurka, but they had made a deep impression upon the heart of
the poor little companion. The portrait sketched by Tomski had struck
her as very exact; and with her romantic ideas, she saw in the rather
ordinary countenance of her adorer something to fear and admire. She was
now sitting down with her cloak off, with bare shoulders; her head,
crowned with flowers, falling forward from fatigue, when suddenly the
door opened and Hermann entered. She shuddered.

\"Where were you?\" she said, trembling all over.

\"In the Countess\'s bedroom. I have just left her,\" replied Hermann.
\"She is dead.\"

\"Great Heavens! What are you saying?\"

\"I am afraid,\" he said, \"that I am the cause of her death.\"

Lisaveta looked at him in consternation, and remembered Tomski\'s words:
\"He has at least three crimes on his conscience.\"

Hermann sat down by the window, and told everything. The young girl
listened with terror.

So those letters so full of passion, those burning expressions, this
daring obstinate pursuit---all this had been inspired by anything but
love! Money alone had inflamed the man\'s soul. She, who had nothing but
a heart to offer, how could she make him happy? Poor child! she had been
the blind instrument of a robber, of the murderer of her old
benefactress. She wept bitterly in the agony of her repentance. Hermann
watched her in silence; but neither the tears of the unhappy girl, nor
her beauty, rendered more touching by her grief, could move his heart of
iron. He had no remorse in thinking of the Countess\'s death. One sole
thought distressed him---the irreparable loss of the secret which was to
have made his fortune.

\"You are a monster!\" said Lisaveta, after a long silence.

\"I did not mean to kill her,\" replied Hermann coldly. \"My pistol was
not loaded.\"

They remained for some time without speaking, without looking at one
another. The day was breaking, and Lisaveta put out her candle. She
wiped her eyes, drowned in tears, and raised them towards Hermann. He
was standing close to the window, his arms crossed, with a frown on his
forehead. In this attitude he reminded her involuntarily of the portrait
of Napoleon. The resemblance overwhelmed her.

\"How am I to get you away?\" she said at last. \"I thought you might go
out by the back stairs. But it would be necessary to go through the
Countess\'s bedroom, and I am too frightened.\"

\"Tell me how to get to the staircase, and I will go alone.\"

She went to a drawer, took out a key, which she handed to Hermann, and
gave him the necessary instructions. Hermann took her icy hand, kissed
her on the forehead, and departed.

He went down the staircase, and entered the Countess\'s bedroom. She was
seated quite stiff in her armchair; but her features were in no way
contracted. He stopped for a moment, and gazed into her face as if to
make sure of the terrible reality. Then he entered the dark room, and,
feeling behind the tapestry, found the little door, which opened on to a
staircase. As he went down it, strange ideas came into his head. \"Going
down this staircase,\" he said to himself, \"some sixty years ago, at
about this time, may have been seen some man in an embroidered coat with
powdered wig, pressing to his breast a cocked hat: some gallant who has
long been buried; and now the heart of his aged mistress has ceased to
beat.\"

At the end of the staircase he found another door, which his key opened,
and he found himself in the corridor which led to the street.

To be continued.

[Chapters 1 & 2](https://southerncrossreview.org/159/queen-of-spades-1-2.html)
