# The Exchange

## by Frank Thomas Smith

![*Plaza Barrego, San Telmo*](the-exchange.jpg){class="a"}


Airplanes seldom have to circle the Buenos Aires International airport
and descend through complex traffic patterns. They start losing altitude
somewhere over Uruguay, cross the mud-colored mouth of the Rio de la
Plata, pass to the east of the sprawling city and glide straight onto a
waiting runway.

Joe Truman took a taxi from the airport to downtown Buenos Aires and
registered at the Sheraton. A month previously two guests were blown out
of their rooms by a terrorist bomb and since then the hotel was almost
empty. Tourists no longer included Argentina in their itineraries and
other visitors took the precaution of staying at less ostentatious
hotels. Truman showered and changed into jeans and lay on the bed to
smoke a cigarette. He was tired from the long flight and wanted to
sleep, but first he had to call Paula Barrentos. He crushed out the
cigarette, lighted another and dialed her number, which he knew by
heart. She answered after the first ring. "It's Joe, Paula."

"Joe! Where are you?" He imagined her sitting on the bed hunched over
the telephone, a beautiful woman who had difficulty keeping her weight
down.

"I just arrived. I'm at the Sheraton, room 606."

"Thank God. Will you be coming here?"

"It would be better if I stayed in the hotel, Paula, so they can contact
me."

"The ransom, Joe?"

"We shouldn't talk about this on the phone. I can be there in a half
hour. Is that all right?"

He took the train to Martínez, an upper middle-class suburb. Paula was
waiting for him with gin tonics. They sat on the veranda while Joe gave
her the bad news, that the company had no insurance for locally hired
employees and had no intention of paying ransom out of its own pocket
for her husband.

"Hijos de puta!" she cried!" Paula wasn't the hysterical type, but she
was close to it now. "That prick of a boss of yours told me they were
sending you and everything would be all right."

"I'm supposed to convince them that there's no money."

"They'll never believe you."

"No," Truman agreed, looking out at the garden instead of at her.
"Although it probably depends on who they are."

"Who they are! Joe, they're the ERP. Who else could they be?"

The *Ejército Revolucionario de Pueblo*. Yes, Truman knew as well as she
did who they were. An originally idealistic Marxist group which began
stealing food from supermarkets and distributing it to the poor, but had
become steadily more vicious, kidnapping high ranking military officers
and company executives and robbing banks. The officers were usually
"executed" for real or imaginary crimes. The businessmen faired better
if their companies came up with the required ransom. If not...well, no
one knew, it hadn't happened, yet.

"I'll do the best I can, Paula," was all he could think of to say.

The ERP contact that evening while Joe Truman was having dinner in his
room. A bellboy brought up an envelope with his name and room number
typed on the front. Inside a brief note in Spanish: *Five million US
dollars. When you have New York's answer call Sra. Barrentos and discuss
the weather*. He put the note in his pocket and walked out of the hotel
and crossed the street to the Plaza San Martin.

It was a warm night, but the Plaza was deserted except for a tramp
sleeping on one of the benches. Truman walked under the enormous
branches of a rubber-tree and across to the enormous statue of a mounted
General San Martin pointing with a bronze finger west to the Andes.
After a while he went back to the hotel, had a drink from the minibar,
watched an old movie on television and slept the deep sleep of the
decided, except for a disturbing dream which he couldn't remember the
next morning.

He phoned Paula Barrentos and commented on the heat. She agreed that it
was hot, understanding that it was a message for someone else.

The telephone rang almost immediately: "What is your answer?" a woman,
whose voice sounded familiar to Truman, asked.

"There is a complication which I must discuss with you personally."

After a brief silence she said she would call him back. Ten minutes
later she was back on the line. "Take a taxi at midnight from the hotel
to Plaza Dorrego in San Telmo -- alone. Dismiss the taxi and sit on one
of the benches in the open, not near the trees."

San Telmo is the ciudad vieja, all that's left of bohemian Buenos Aires
where, in normal times, the restaurants would still be full and old men
would be playing chess under the trees and the guitars of young
musicians in the plaza would be competing with melancholy tango music
drifting like cigarette smoke from the bars. Century-old streetlamps
threw feeble arcs of gray light onto the plaza.

"Sr. Truman?" The voice is behind him. He twists around on the bench to
see where it comes from. A tiny Fiat 600 had stopped on the street with
its lights out. A young woman gets out of the front seat and motions for
him to approach. She gets into the back leaving the front door open.
Truman sits next to the driver, a thin young man with a full beard, who
tells him to shut the door. They drive for a few minutes with the lights
out. It seems to Truman that they are more conspicuous that way than if
they had been turned on. Suddenly they swerve sharply to the right and
Truman is thrown against the driver, who jams the brakes on hard. They
are in a narrow, night-cloaked alley.

"What is the complication you wanted to discuss, Sr. Truman?" the woman
asks. Her politeness strikes him as incongruous. What should he call her
-- señorita? señora? He settles for nothing and turns to look at her,
but can barely define her silhouette. Then he realizes why her voice
sounded familiar on the phone -- it is Mireya's voice.

"My employers are not able to pay for Barrentos's release," he says,
purposefully avoiding the word ransom.

"Not willing, you mean," the woman says.

"Not able. You see, the company's liquidity is low at the moment and the
insurance doesn't cover local employees." He turns back to the front.
"They don't want to establish a precedent."

"We give you ten days to change your mind and if you don't we will be
forced to execute Mr. Barrentos," the woman says matter-of-factly. "You
and your company will be responsible, not us. And we don't want to
establish a precedent either"

"They won't change their minds."

"How can you be so sure?"

"I know them. They didn't send Barrentos here so they feel they're not
responsible for him. That's why he's not covered by the insurance."

"So we picked the wrong man. Too bad for him"

His cue. If he had been thinking of backing down, of getting out of that
Mickey Mouse car and going back to the hotel with nothing accomplished,
her last words would have stopped him. Who is this woman with Mireya's
voice? A relative perhaps? It's possible, Mireya had a big family. Does
she have authority or is she only a messenger like himself carrying bad
news?

"Yes, you did," he says, making an effort to keep his voice steady. "You
should have acted earlier and taken me. It would have been easier to
collect." His mouth is dry and his knees are shaking. He takes a deep
breath. "If you release Barrentos and keep me\...Well, I'm American, the
insurance covers me."

"Why would you want to do that?"

"It would be the solution for everybody, that's all."

"Except you."

Truman shrugs to himself in the dark. "Barrentos has a family, I don't.
And he's a good friend. If I hadn't been transferred you'd have
kidnapped me anyway."

She says nothing.

"They'll pay for me and they won't for him. It's that simple."

"Do they know about this idea in New York?"

"Of course not. And they mustn't know that it's was my idea. When you
heard that they won't pay for Barrentos you decided to keep me, that's
all."

The driver, who has been silent till now, says, "We'll have to discuss
it with the others," perhaps to head off the woman's refusal. "All
right," she says. "Go back to the hotel and wait for my call."

"When do you think that might be?"

"Just wait there."

Cacho, as Oscar Barrentos' friends called him, had introduced Joe Truman
to Mireya. She was killed in an automobile accident on the road to Mar
del Plata where they were going on vacation. It was the other driver's
fault, but Truman blamed himself for even attempting the trip in summer
when that particular road was overrun by reckless maniacs -- especially
when Mireya was pregnant. If it hadn't been for Cacho, a true friend who
stuck by him through the aftermath of deep depression, he might have
killed himself. Finally he was transferred to head office in New York
because he was too likely a candidate for kidnapping by the leftwing
terrorists. The company said that Barrentos, his assistant, now manager,
offered a smaller target because he was an Argentine national. Joe
Truman was not displeased. New York might provide respite from painful
memories.

She calls at dawn.

"Take the subway, Palermo line, to the last stop. You will be met when
you go up to the street," Mireya's voice said.

"When?"

"Now."

Truman packs his carry-on bag and checks out of the hotel. He walks
through the soft morning mist that covers the Plaza San Martin. Twenty
minutes later he's standing in front of the Palermo subway exit. The
Fiat turns the corner and stops. The woman is already in the back seat,
so Truman opens the front door and gets in next to the driver, who hands
him a pair of opaque sunglasses. "Don't try to look over the top of the
glasses," he says. "It will be better for you if you don't see where
we're going. What's in the bag?" He searches it and hands it back.

The drive in silence against the city-bound traffic. After a half-hour
they stop and the driver tells him to get out. The woman takes his arm
like a wife or lover and leads him to the entrance of a suburban house.
He feels the sun's warmth on his face and wonders when will be the next
time he has that pleasure. He hears her open two locks. They walk
through an empty room and she knocks on another door. When it's opened
from the inside she tells Truman to take off his glasses and leads the
way down a steep flight of stone stairs into a damp basement room. A ray
of sunlight carrying specks of dust enters through a small barred window
near the ceiling. A young man with a rifle over his knees is sitting on
one of the two chairs which constitute the only furniture.

Oscar Barrentos is lying on a mattress on the floor reading a battered
copy of Marx's CAPITAL. It occurs to Truman that he forgot to bring
reading material.

When Barrentos sees Truman, he yells "Joe!", drops the book and jumps to
his feet. The two men are about the same height, but Barrentos is dark
with receding hair and sharp features that give a bird-like effect.
Truman carries considerably more mass and is fair.

"Tell him your proposal, please," the woman says with that irritating
courtesy. He has his first good look at her. Except for her voice, there
is no resemblance to Mireya. She is a boyishly attractive young woman
dressed in jeans, running shoes and a man's shirt. She could have been
one of the Company's secretaries on her day off with nothing on her mind
except her next tennis lesson.

"The insurance doesn't cover locally hired employees, Cacho," Truman
says. "And the Company isn't about to pay what our friends here want.
Barrentos, unshaven and gaunter than usual, looks as though he's been
slapped in the face. His first thought when he saw his friend was that
he had come with the money for his release. "So," Truman goes on, "I
think the best solution would be an exchange."

"What do you mean?"

"You for me. I'm not locally employed so the insurance company will have
to pay up. You go to New York and say that when I told them you weren't
covered, they decided to keep me instead." He grins. "We gringos have
all the luck, as you are so fond of saying."

"You will leave Argentina immediately together with your family," the
woman tells Barrentos. "In New York you will arrange for five million
dollars to be paid according to instructions we will give you there.
Once we have the money we will release Mr. Truman. If the money is not
paid we will be forced to execute him."

Barrentos looks dazed. "I don't know what to say, Joe."

"I do. Go on up there and get back here with the money as soon as you
can." He glances at the book on the floor. "I don't feel like reading
that thing more than twice."

Barrentos embraces him with tears in his eyes. A few minutes later he
leaves the house wearing the opaque glasses and with the woman on his
arm. Joe Truman takes off his jacket, folds it neatly, places it on the
mattress as a pillow and lays down. He picks up "Capital" and opens it
to the first chapter.

The Chairman sat facing his L-shaped window without seeing the
skyscrapers outside. His hands were pressed together as though in
prayer, with the fingertips touching his chin. He swiveled toward
Barrentos. "I see a problem here, Oscar."

"A problem, sir?"

The Chairman liked being called sir, but usually only the foreign
employees called him that. "We've had people kidnapped before, in
Brazil, Guatemala and Colombia. We know they don't kidnap
intermediaries. If ransom is refused they start to threaten, may even
kill the hostage, but they always need intermediaries for negotiations
and don't want to establish a precedent. Do you know what I suspect?"

"No, sir." Barrentos hands were trembling, so he kept them tightly
clasped on his lap.

"That you and Joe Truman cooked this up. Don't get me wrong, I believe
they've got him, but it was his idea, because he's covered and you're
not. The insurance people will think the same, they might even
suspect\..." He broke off and gazed at his manicured fingernails. "They
don't even want us to tell our people in the field that we have kidnap
insurance. They're afraid of collusion with so much money involved." He
sighed. "It just goes to show the danger of letting expatriate people
stay in one place too long. They go native. Well, it's too late now,
you'll just have to stick to your story."

"There was no collusion, sir,"

"Of course not, I'm not saying there was. It's just what the insurance
company will think. They won't like it but we'll raise hell and they'll
have to pay. They'll ask a lot of questions, so it may take a while.
Look, write a memorandum, complete, fool-proof, have my secretary type
it, no one else."

"I already have." Barrentos fumbled at his attaché-case latch, opened it
and handed the Chairman a three-page memorandum. "I typed it myself."

"Good. I'll pass it on to our legal department and let you know."

A few weeks later a young man, a boy really, who was being tortured in
the Naval Mechanics School in Buenos Aires, broke. Among other things,
he told his inquisitors where Joe Truman was being held. This was more
than they expected, for they hadn't even known he'd been kidnapped. They
checked with the company's acting manager, Oscar Barrentos's assistant,
who only knew that Barrentos was in New York. He assumed the company had
paid the ransom for him.

The Military Police decide to find out for themselves. They go to the
house where Joe Truman is being held. It is shuttered and looks
unoccupied. They announce through a loud-speaker that the terrorists
have fifteen minutes to come out with their hands up. Not even the
tortured boy knew that they had built a tunnel to the house behind them
which exited onto the next street. Four of them, including the woman and
the driver, are about to enter the tunnel from the basement room, when
the bearded driver says, "It was a double-cross. Do I let him have it?"

The woman looks at Joe Truman standing in the corner. To him her brief
hesitation seems an eternity. "No, save your bullets, you may need them.
Go on ahead." She nods to Truman and says, "Let's go, Mr. Truman. I
still like your proposition." He goes willingly, almost gratefully into
the tunnel and she follows and closes the trapdoor behind her. The
Military Police, however, have surrounded the whole block and when the
group emerges from the other house, which is closed and shuttered as
well, they are met by twenty police rifles aimed at them. Knowing what
awaits them if they are captured, they open fire and are cut down by a
hail of bullets.

Lying in the street bleeding to death, Joe Truman remembers the dream he
had in the hotel the first night, the one he hadn't been able to recall.
He was under water, held down by an invisible weight. A child swam
toward him. He recognized him as the son he and Mireya would have had if
she had lived. The child held out his hand to Joe and led him to a spot
where the sun had spread a blanket of orange light over the water.

Now, as he dies, the child comes again.

A year later, the Armed Forces overthrew the defunct government of
Isabel Peron. They made short work of the *Ejército Revolucionario del
Pueblo*, as well as thousands of innocent people. It may never be known
how many were killed in the so-called "dirty war". In any event, order
was restored and Oscar Barrentos was appointed General Manager of the
company's operations in South America. He eventually bought a week-end
house in the mountains of the south, near Bariloche, where he and Joe
Truman had often fished and hiked together. His wife Paula gave birth to
their first son (they already had a daughter) whom they wanted to name
Joseph, but as Argentine civil law only allows Spanish Christian names,
they had to settle for José. Nevertheless, the boy's family and friends
always call him Joe.

When Joe was a teen-ager, Carlos Barrentos decided it was time to tell
him why he had been named after an American. The boy listened to the
story in silence, then asked, "What did you say his last name was?"

"Truman."

"That means *hombre de verdad*, doesn't it?"

"Yes, it does," his father answered.

"How do you feel about him -- I mean what happened to him?"

Barrentos leaned back, breathed deeply, then said, "Well, sad\...and
grateful, very grateful."

"Me too," Joe said. He thrust his hands into his pockets as the
Americans do and walked down to the lake over which the setting sun was
spreading a blanket of orange light.
