# "Now Is the Time to Be Angry"

![](afghan.jpg){class="alarge"}

### Remembering Forgotten Afghanistan

## By [Ann Jones](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/annjones/)

I know, I know. It's the last thing you want to hear about. Twenty years
of American carnage in Afghanistan was plenty for you, I'm sure, and
there are so many other things to worry about in an America at the edge
of... well, who knows what? But for me, it's different. I went to
Afghanistan in 2002, already angry about this country's misbegotten war
on that poor land, to offer what help I could to Afghan women. And
little as I may have been able to do in those years, Afghanistan left a
deep and lasting impression on me. 

So, while this country has fled its shameful Afghan War, I, in some
sense, am still there. That's partly because I've kept in touch with
Afghan women friends and colleagues, some living through the nightmare
of the Taliban back again and others improbably here in America,
confined in military barracks to await resettlement in the very country
that so thoroughly wrecked their own. And after all these years, I'd at
least like to offer some thoughts on the subject, starting with a little
history that most Americans know nothing about. 

So be patient with me. War is [never over when it's
over](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0312573065/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
And it would be wrong to simply leave Afghanistan and its people in the
dust of our disastrous departure. For me, at least, some thoughts are in
order.

**A Little History**

News about America's chaotic exit from Afghanistan was swift, ugly, and
then all over and largely forgotten. The news cycle moved on to the next
sensation. But consider me behind the times. I'm still lost in
remembrance of the years I spent in Afghanistan and the tales I was told
of earlier days in a proud and peaceful land.  Afghan history is so much
longer and more complex than we know. But let me take you back for a
moment to what may still prove to have been the last best days of
Afghanistan.

Muhammad Zahir Shah, the final king of that country, ascended to the
throne in 1933. He was only 19, but already planning
Afghanistan's future. He didn't want the country to be communist --- or
capitalist. He didn't want Afghanistan to become a servant of the Soviet
Union or of any of the other large, overbearing countries in its
vicinity. He wanted it to take its place in the world as a modern social
democracy and so proposed a new constitution, an elected parliament,
egalitarian civil rights for men and women alike, and universal suffrage
to sustain just such a democratic state. He even enrolled Afghanistan in
the international League of Nations.

British India, France, and Germany had already built and staffed
modern-language high schools in Kabul, including one established in 1921
for girls. King Zahir Shah then built a modern university with faculties
of medicine, law, science, and letters. After 1960, when the entire
university became coeducational, American universities helped it
establish yet more fields of study, including agriculture, education,
and engineering. Photographs exist of its young students, women and men
alike, clad in modern European garb, seated together on the campus lawn.
 

During the 1960s, Afghanistan became the most popular stop for European
and American students traveling east along the world famous [Hippie
Trail](https://www.messynessychic.com/2014/03/11/road-trip-to-afghanistan-snapshots-from-the-lost-hippie-trail/).
In southern Afghanistan, U.S. engineers and their families [settled
in](https://www.npr.org/2012/07/03/156114613/a-cautionary-tale-about-transforming-afghanistan)
to conduct an American aid project. Working with Afghans, they built
dams and irrigation systems to bring the arid land of the South to life.
Such developments were filmed in black and white and clipped into
newsreels shown in American movie theaters, so that moviegoers could
feel good about what their country was doing around the world.

Then, in 1973, while King Zahir Shah was on a trip to Italy, his cousin,
brother-in-law, and former prime minister, Mohammed Daoud, suddenly
declared a new Republic of Afghanistan and named himself president,
prime minister, foreign minister, and minister of defense.  And so ended
the Afghan monarchy and a 40-year-long peace in a remarkably progressive
Afghanistan.

One coup begets another. Five years later, Daoud himself was shot and
killed to launch the Saur (April) Revolution. He would be replaced by a
newly minted communist leader, Noor Mohammad Taraki, the founder of the
Marxist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA). Some of the
party's modern ideas, especially education for girls and women, had
already been well established in the capital, but in the countryside
they were met with violent opposition that split the party in two. A
more conservative communist party, Parcham, arose to battle the
revolutionary PDPA.  Thousands of Afghans would be killed in the
struggle. Exiled King Zahir Shah said sadly that his decision to send
some outstanding young Afghan men to be educated in Moscow had been "a
great mistake."

But it was Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Jimmy Carter's national
security advisor, who, as Chalmers Johnson [revealed long
ago](https://tomdispatch.com/best-of-tomdispatch-chalmers-johnson-the-cia-and-a-blowback-world/),
provoked the Soviet Union to send the Red Army in to clean up the mess.
That was the first misstep in the USSR's 10-year-long unwinnable war in
Afghanistan against mujahideen guerillas, both local and foreign. By
then, Washington had shifted its attention from irrigation to espionage,
sabotage, and what was euphemistically termed "special interest."

When an estimated 50,000 to 100,000 Afghans had been killed and it
appeared that the Russians were going to fight until the last Afghan was
dead, CIA Director Stansfield Turner questioned America's incitement of
what had clearly become an apocalyptic war. He asked whether it was
right to "use other peoples for the geopolitical interests of the United
States?"

By the time Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev signed a peace treaty with
the Afghans in 1988 and the last Soviet soldiers
[fled](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/16/world/middleeast/afghanistan-taliban-soviet-friendship-bridge.html)
the country in February 1989, [some two million
Afghans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet–Afghan_War) had been
killed. And even then, the U.S. didn't stop meddling in that country's
affairs, prompting yet more conflict among factions of the Afghan
mujahideen. By the time the U.S. abandoned the country in 1992 after the
Soviet Union had collapsed, the U.N. reported that nearly two million
more Afghans had been killed and another 600,000 to two million maimed.

In that period, more than six million Afghans had fled to Pakistan and
Iran, becoming the world's largest population of refugees from a single
country. Another two million sought refuge in other countries, while two
million more became internal refugees.  The Afghan casualties of that
period of seamless wars added up to about half the population of prewar
Afghanistan, a country that, by the way, is about the size of Texas.

Only four years later, the Taliban ("students") rose up from the south
and, propelled by Pakistan, captured the capital, Kabul, proclaiming the
Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. A new, more primitive Afghanistan
steeped in the Taliban's hard-boiled brand of Deobandi Islamic
fundamentalism would then be created.

Women were confined to their homes, girls kept from school. Zahir Shah,
still in exile in Italy, must have regretted his second truly bad
mistake as king: he had sent another group of young Afghan men to Egypt
to study fundamentalist Islam. The graduates, hiding out in Pakistan
during the Afghan war against the Soviets, had formed seven radical
groups, seven militias, all supported by Pakistan, the United Arab
Emirates, and --- because America chose godliness over democracy --- the
U.S.A. It was then (and still remains) past time to raise Stansfield
Turner's question again: Was it ever right for Washington to "use other
peoples for the geopolitical interests of the United States?"

**A Personal Story**

I opposed the American war in Afghanistan.  

The assault upon America's military-industrial-congressional complex
that smashed the Pentagon, brought down New York's twin towers, and
aimed (via a plane that [crashed in
Pennsylvania](https://www.history.com/topics/21st-century/flight-93))
for the Capitol had not been launched by Afghans, but by suicidal Saudi
Arabian hijackers carrying out the plan of their Saudi mastermind Osama
bin Laden, who happened to be living in Afghanistan then. The Taliban
government tried to negotiate with George W. Bush's administration to
bargain for time --- perhaps to hand over bin Laden, or even to
surrender themselves.

In that context, the hasty, knee-jerk vote of Congress, supposedly a
"deliberative body," to
"[authorize](https://www.congress.gov/107/plaws/publ40/PLAW-107publ40.pdf)"
military force seemed to me a reckless display of mindless, macho
muscle-flexing by men who knew they would not be required to fight in
the war they were about to bring upon this country and the innocent
people of Afghanistan.  Only Democratic Congresswoman Barbara Lee of
California had the courage to vote against the mob. For her principled
stand, she was [reviled and
threatened](https://www.washingtonpost.com/history/2021/08/17/barbara-lee-afghanistan-vote/)
by Americans who did not hesitate to offer opportunities for heroism to
other people's children.

Initially, a trigger-happy administration in Washington didn't even bomb
bin Laden's compound in rural Afghanistan. Instead, it
[bombed](https://edition.cnn.com/2001/US/10/07/gen.america.under.attack/)
Kabul, among other places, until there was truly nothing left to bomb.
President Bush proclaimed victory. Laura Bush
[delivered](https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/nation/specials/attacked/transcripts/laurabushtext_111701.html)
a radio address, declaring that America had liberated the women of
Afghanistan almost as if they had thrown off their burqas and become
"free." For his part, Bush paid off a posse of Afghan strongmen to
search for bin Laden --- predictably they didn't find him --- while he
himself, along with Vice President Cheney and Secretary of Defense
[Donald
Rumsfeld](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/feb/24/freedomofinformation.september11)
warmed up for yet another prefabricated war, this time against Iraq.

I arrived in Kabul in early 2002 after the bombing had stopped, as a
volunteer with a small NGO run by and for women. From my frigid room on
the second floor of what had once been a house, I looked down upon a
bungalow next door: the windows still painted white to prevent people
from staring at the women confined there *and* to prevent the women from
looking out. It seemed, whatever Laura Bush might have imagined, that
they had not been set free by America's bombs.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

In fact, it took both time and courage for women in the capital and
other Afghan urban centers to find one another and begin to make common
cause. From 2002, I worked with some of those women for years, not so
much teaching or leading them, as merely answering questions, offering
friendship and assistance as they worked together to make their own way
out of those confining burqas and into a new world of greater
confidence.

They chose their own projects, their own strategies, their own
compatriots. Then they entered public life, denouncing violence against
women, backing women candidates for the new legislature, and publicizing
their work. They developed ways to help widows, child brides, new
mothers, rape victims, battered women, incarcerated women, and the raft
of girls who had tried and failed to commit suicide by setting
themselves on fire.

"Night Letters," as they were known, were nailed to the gates of our
office compound, threatening us with death and worse.  But the women,
many of them very young, tore those letters up and just kept on working.
They worked in hospitals, courts, jails, schools, and government
ministries. They supported women and girls who were becoming athletes,
musicians, and singers, as well as reporters for newspapers, radio
stations, and TV. With the support of fathers, brothers, and husbands,
women and girls, in the cities at least, were making the world anew. At
the same time, the so-called International Community, led by the United
States, carried its war, and its bombs and Hellfire missiles, into the
heartland of the country and the strongholds of the Taliban.

Among an older generation of urban women were the well-educated former
teachers, professors, doctors, lawyers, judges, and others from that
older, better time, capable of helping rebuild a peaceful and improved
society. With the support of international NGOs, urban Afghan women,
young and old, set out to do just that, although many would be murdered
along the way. Still, the success of their work could be seen --- until
last August --- in a new post-Taliban generation: the young women and
girls who walked fearlessly to work or school dressed in clothes of
their own devising, long loose shirts, pants, and bright headscarves,
the uniform of a brave new world. 

But that new world had not reached the 70% of the country that remained
"rural." As Anand Gopal [recently
reported](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/09/13/the-other-afghan-women)
movingly in the* New Yorker* magazine, Afghanistan's "other women"
living in the countryside had not been visited by progress or peace.
They had instead been
[plagued](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/afghanistan-village-us-taliban/2021/10/04/e531303c-214a-11ec-a8d9-0827a2a4b915_story.html)
by the assaults of foreign forces, of American-trained Afghan soldiers,
and of murderous American "air support." If the lives of rural women as
the chattel of the Taliban were grim, they were made much worse by
American forces carrying out their own ill-conceived sense of duty.

And now, the Taliban has predictably come again for the women of the
cities. None who survived Taliban rule had forgotten what life was like
then. Not after spending five years confined to the house, venturing out
only with a male keeper, half-blinded by a wretched burqa, fearful of
the punitive squads of men from the Ministry for the Promotion of Virtue
and Prevention of Vice who patrolled the streets, bearing their
corrective whips.

Those were the same sorts of whips today's Taliban were seen [using
again](https://www.cnn.com/2021/09/08/asia/afghanistan-women-taliban-government-intl/index.html)
in August on the women of Kabul. That's when they changed the name of
Afghanistan's Ministry for Women's Affairs back to the Ministry for the
Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice. Suddenly, we were once again
back in the previous century.

**Flight**

In mid-August, women activists in Kabul fortunate enough to have
passports checked their documents, packed essentials, and made their way
carefully to that city's airport. They came with colleagues, husbands,
children, babies, and parents, with families large and small. Some ---
the lucky ones --- waited at the airport for hours. Many more waited for
days. Many were turned away for lack of "papers." One of my friends and
her family passed the documents test, waited two or three days inside
the airport, and then boarded a plane already inexplicably crowded with
Pakistanis.  

Friends who made it onto flights to the U.S. now speak of grief, terror,
exhaustion, impatience, fear, chaos, hope, gratitude, and sorrow. All
hearts are broken. One is a lawyer I met almost 20 years ago when, as a
teenager, she came to work at a German-sponsored women's organization.
 She rose over the years to lead the office, then left it for law school
and a new role as an advocate for women in the courts. Now, she's
confined with her husband and sons, along with
[13,000](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/afghan-evacuees-relocated-to-wisconsin-describe-fleeing-the-taliban/)
other Afghans, at Fort McCoy in Wisconsin. Another friend, a founder of
the Afghan Women's Network, once summoned to Washington to meet Hillary
Clinton, among others, is now detained at Fort McCoy with nine members
of her family, including a brother and a sister confined to wheelchairs
by debilitating afflictions that seem to have no English name.

Both of these friends, as English speakers and leaders, have been called
upon to attend management meetings at Fort McCoy to help with tough
questions like: "What do Afghan people eat?" Meanwhile, thousands of
"rescued" Afghans, half of them children, are daily standing in very
long lines, waiting for food they hope they might recognize.

My two friends are exhausted, but they don't complain. They say that the
officers there do listen, that the food does look a little more
familiar, and that the long lines move a little faster.  They also speak
of other colleagues left behind: women and their families who couldn't
get inside Kabul airport, as well as others who did get in but were
never able to board a plane, or made it onto a plane only to be thrown
off again. My friends say sadly, "We are the lucky ones." But no one
knows when they will be released from Fort McCoy or where they will be
sent.

In the meantime, the phone is their lifeline (and mine, too). It's also
a lifeline to Afghanistan where, for instance, I often talk to my
wonderful friend Mahbouba Seraj, [about
whom](https://tomdispatch.com/ann-jones-the-never-ending-war/) I've
written for *TomDispatch* before. She has long been an American citizen.
Her prominent family fled the murderous Communist regime when she was a
girl, but she's lived and worked in both countries all her life. Now,
she's chosen to remain in Kabul. A founder of the [Afghan Women's
Network](http://www.afghanwomensnetwork.org/), she now cares for about
40 women who have sought refuge in its Women's Shelter.

Mahbouba Seraj is passionate about her homeland and scornful of the Big
Men, past and present, foreign and domestic, who choose to inflict their
second-hand ideas by force. This time around, the Taliban first stole
her vehicles, then came late at night demanding to see the women in the
shelter. She spoke to them firmly about the importance of good Afghan
manners, such as respect for the privacy of women and warned that, if
they carried on as they were doing, no one in Kabul would have any
respect for them.  Then she invited them to call at her office in the
morning to discuss their business, as is the Afghan custom, over a cup
of tea. They left and some days later, miraculously enough, they
returned her vehicles.

Outspoken and brave as she is, Mahbouba Seraj is sought after by
visiting journalists. *Frontline*
[broadcast](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/taliban-afghanistan-womens-rights-mahbouba-seraj/)
a riveting account in mid-October of the abrupt American exodus from
Afghanistan.  It included two interviews with Seraj, identified
correctly as "one of the most influential women in Afghanistan." She
surprises the reporter --- himself an Afghan-American --- by saying that
she wants to "really talk" with some Taliban leaders. A second interview
is interrupted by a woman seeking Seraj's help. She fears the Taliban
may have taken her daughter. Seraj sends her gently home, saying there's
nothing she can do. The reporter asks: "Can't you protect her?"

"No," Seraj says, "I cannot protect any woman." The stunned reporter
persists: Can't she call someone? She replies that, of course, she used
to be able to call influential people, mentioning men in the offices of
past Afghan presidents, but "now there is no one to call." At the
moment, though the Taliban have indeed taken control of Kabul, there
simply is no real government. There is, in fact, no indication that the
Taliban will be able to construct such a thing as a government, and
certainly not a government that represents the people.

No one is in charge of anything really. There's no hierarchy among the
Taliban, and the American habit of naming certain Talibs as Number 1 and
Number 2 doesn't make it so.  Any member of the Taliban or the rival
Haqqani Network seen one day as Number 1 may never be seen again. And
yet here they are, after 20 years of America's Afghanistan, already not
one but two rival hyper-religious and violent factions, the Haqqani
Network aligned with Pakistan and the Taliban with their god.

Who actually won the war is already a matter of dispute.

The *Frontline* reporter seemed baffled by the vehemence of Mahbouba
Seraj. Then, referring to her inability to save the lost daughter, he
asked, "Does this make you sad?" She took a breath, as I know she does
when she finds an interlocutor is missing her point. Then she replied
fiercely, "No, it makes me angry. This is no time to be sad. Now is the
time to be angry."

I'm thousands of miles away in a kind of safety Mahbouba Seraj has
repudiated. But I'm angry, too. Especially because, for decades, now,
I've seen, sometimes first-hand, the damage done by America's toxic
militarism --- not only to the Afghan people but to our own misguided
soldiers as well. The only "winners" in the long Afghan war are the
members of America's military-industrial-congressional complex, who
[continue to be
funded](https://www.commondreams.org/news/2021/10/19/corporate-dems-belly-ache-over-social-investments-senate-panel-approves-extra-29)
as if they were the ultimate winners of everything. *PolitiFact* reports
that the Pentagon has handed [more than \$100 billion
](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2021/aug/31/mandela-barnes/yes-over-100-billion-was-spent-military-contracts-/)to
military contractors alone, while the generals who ran our losing wars
[join](https://www.stripes.com/theaters/us/2021-09-04/corporate-boards-consulting-speaking-fees-generals-thrived-afghanistan-2769780.html)
corporate boards of military industries, give remarkably well-paid
speeches, and "consult." So many thousands of Afghan civilians and
[American](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
and allied soldiers died for that.

Copyright 2021 Ann Jones

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A
](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[Nation
Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [Ann Jones](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/annjones/)

**Ann Jones**,
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/americas-child-soldiers/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/americas-child-soldiers/),
is a non-resident fellow of the [Quincy Institute for Responsible
Statecraft](https://quincyinst.org/). She is at work on a book about
social democracy in Norway (and its absence in the United States). She
is the author of several books, including *Kabul in Winter: Life Without
Peace in Afghanistan* and most recently [*They Were Soldiers: How the
Wounded Return from America's Wars \-- the Untold
Stor*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[*y*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
a Dispatch Books original.

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/annjones/)

Thanks to \<a
href="[https://tomdispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/)">\</a>
TomDispatch.com, where this article originally appeared.
