## ![St. Francis of Assis](st-francis.jpg){class="a"}

# The Spiritual Foundation of Morality

### One of Three Lectures by

## Rudolf Steiner

Norrk√∂ping, May 28, 1912 -- GA155\
Translated by M. Cotterell

We have to consider in these coming days one of the most
important and significant fields of our Anthroposophical study of
life. We are often reproached for our inclination towards the study
of far-distant cosmic developments in their connection with man; it
is said that we like to lift ourselves into spiritual worlds, too
frequently only considering the far-distant events of the past and
the far-reaching perspective of the future, and that we disregard a
sphere which concerns man most intimately --- the sphere of human
morals and human ethics.

It is true that this, the realm of human morals, must be looked upon
as the most essential of all. But what must be said in answer to the
reproach that we are less concerned with this important field of
man\'s soul-life and social life than with more distant spheres, is
that when we realize the significance and range of anthroposophical
life and feeling we are only able to approach this subject with the
deepest reverence, for it concerns humanity very closely indeed; and
we realize that, if it is to be considered in the right way, it
requires the most earnest and serious preparation. The above
reproach might perhaps be stated in the following words: What is the
use of making deep studies of the universe? Why talk about numerous
reincarnations or the complicated conditions of karma, when surely
the most important thing in life is what a certain wise man after he
had attained the summit of this life, and when after a life of rich
wisdom he had grown so weak and ill that he had to be carried about,
repeated again and again to his followers: "Children, love one
another!"

These words were uttered by John the Evangelist when he was an old
man, and it has often been said that in these four words, "Children,
love one another!" is contained the extract of the deepest and most
practical moral wisdom. Hence many might say: "What more is wanted,
provided these good, sublime and moral ideals can be so simply
fulfilled as in the sense of the words of the Evangelist John?"

When to the above statement one adds that it is sufficient for
people to know that they ought to love one another, one thing is
lost sight of, namely, the circumstance that he who uttered these
words did so at the close of a long life of wisdom, a life which
included the writing of the most profound and important of the
Gospels. A man is only justified in saying anything so simple at the
end of a rich life of wisdom. But one who is not in that position
must first, by going deeply into the foundations of the secrets of
the world, earn the right to utter the highest moral truths in such
a simple manner.

Trivial as is the oft-repeated assertion, "If the same thing is said
by two persons it never is the same," it is especially applicable to
the words we have quoted. When someone who simply declines to know
or understand anything about the mysteries of the Cosmos says: "It
is quite a simple matter to describe the highest moral life," and
uses the words: "Children, love one another," it is quite different
from when the evangelist John utters these words, at the close of
such a rich life of wisdom. For this reason, he who understands
these words of St. John ought to draw from them quite a different
conclusion from that usually drawn. The conclusion should be that
one has first of all to be silent about such profoundly significant
words, and that they may only be uttered when one has gone through
the necessary preparation and reached the necessary maturity.

Now after we have made this statement --- which it is quite certain
many will take earnestly to heart --- something quite different,
which is of the deepest importance will come to our mind. Someone
might say: "It may be the case that the deep significance of moral
principles can only be understood when the goal of all wisdom is
reached, man uses them, nevertheless, all the time. How could some
moral community or social work be carried on if one had to wait for
a knowledge of the highest moral principles till the end of a life
of striving for wisdom? Morals are most necessary for human social
life; and now it is asserted that moral principles can only be
obtained at the end of long striving after wisdom." A person might
therefore reasonably say that he would doubt the wise arrangement of
the world if this were so; if that which is most necessary could
only be gained after the goal of human effort had been attained.

Life itself gives us the true answer to what has just been said. You
need only compare two facts which, in one form or another, are no
doubt well known to you and you will at once perceive that the one
can be right as well as the other; firstly, that we attain to the
highest moral principles and their understanding only at the
conclusion of seeking after wisdom, and secondly, that moral and
social communities and activities cannot exist without ethics or
morals. You see this at once if you bear in mind two facts with
which you are most certainly acquainted in one form or another. You
may have known a person who was highly developed intellectually, he
may have possessed not only a clear intellectual grasp of natural
science, but he may also have understood many occult and spiritual
truths both theoretically and practically and yet you may have known
that such a person was not particularly moral. Who has not seen
people clever and highly intellectual going morally astray? And who
has not also experienced the other fact, from which much may be
learned! You doubtless have known someone with a very restricted
outlook, with limited intellect and knowing little, who being in
service brought up not her own but other people\'s children. From
their earliest days she has probably assisted with their education
and development and perhaps to the day of her death sacrificed to
these children all she had in a selfless loving way and with the
utmost devotion; yet if one had brought to her the moral principles
that one had gained from the highest sources of wisdom, she would
not, in all probability, have been particularly interested; she
would probably have found them useless and incomprehensible. On the
other hand her moral actions had accomplished more than mere
recognition of moral principles. In such cases we feel that we must
bow in reverence before what streams out of the heart into life and
creates an infinite amount of good.

Facts of such a nature often answer the riddles of life far more
clearly than theoretical explanations, for we say to ourselves that
a wise Providence, in order to impart to the world moral actions,
moral activities, has not waited until people have discovered moral
principles. There is in fact --- if we disregard immoral actions,
the basis of which we shall get to know in these lectures ---
something contained in the human soul as a divine heritage,
something given to us as original morality which may be called
"instinctive morality" and it is this which makes it possible for
humanity to wait until it can fathom moral principles.

But perhaps it is quite unnecessary to trouble much about
investigating moral principles! Might it not be said that it is best
if people trust to their original moral instincts and do not perplex
themselves with theoretical explanations about morals? These
lectures are to show that this is not the case. They are to show
that, at least in the present epoch of humanity, we must seek for
anthroposophical morals and that these morals must be exercised as a
duty which comes as the fruit of all our anthroposophical science
and practice.

The philosopher Schopenhauer, in spite of much that is entirely
erroneous in his philosophy, made this very true statement regarding
the principles of morality. "To preach morals is easy, but to give
them a foundation is difficult." This statement is very true, for
there is scarcely anything easier than to pronounce in a manner
appealing to the commonest principles of human feeling and
perception, what a person ought to do or leave undone in order that
he may be a good person. Many people no doubt are offended when it
is asserted that this is easy, but it *is* easy, and one who knows
life, and knows the world, will not doubt that scarcely anything has
been spoken about so much as the right principles of ethical action,
and the person who speaks upon general ethical principles meets with
almost universal approval. One might say it pleases listening minds,
for they feel they can agree in an unqualified manner with what the
speaker says when he discourses on the very commonest principles of
human morality.

Notwithstanding this, morals are certainly not established by
ethical teachings or moral sermons. Truly not. If morals could thus
be founded there would be no immorality today, for one might say
that the whole of humanity would be overflowing with moral
activities. For undoubtedly everyone has the opportunity of hearing
the finest moral principles since people are so fond of preaching
them. But to know what one ought to do and what is morally right is
of least importance compared with the fact that there should be
within us impulses which, through their inward strength, their
inward power, are themselves converted into moral actions, and thus
express themselves externally. It is well known that ethical sermons
do not produce this result. A moral foundation is laid when a person
is guided to the source whence he must draw the impulses which shall
supply him with forces leading to ethical activity.

How difficult these forces are to find is shown by the simple fact
that innumerable attempts have been made, for example from the
philosophical side, to found a system of ethics, a code of morals.
How many different answers exist in the world to the questions:
"What is goodness?" --- "What is virtue?" Put together what the
philosophers have said, beginning with Plato and Aristotle, and
passing on through the Epicureans, the Stoics, the NeoPlatonists,
the whole series down to modern philosophical opinions; put together
all that has been said from Plato to Herbert Spencer about the
nature of Goodness and Virtue and you will see how many different
attempts have been made to penetrate to the sources of moral life
and impulse.

I hope in these lectures to show that it is only by delving into the
occult secrets of life that it becomes possible to penetrate not
only to moral teachings, but to moral impulses, to the moral sources
of life itself.

A single glance will show us that this moral principle in the world
is by no means such a simple matter as might be supposed from a
certain convenient standpoint. Let us for the moment take no notice
of what is usually spoken of as "moral," but consider certain
spheres of human life from which we may perhaps be able to obtain a
great deal towards a moral conception of life.

Not the least among the many things learned from spiritual science
is the knowledge that most manifold conceptions and impulses have
held good among various peoples in different parts of the earth. In
comparing two sections of humanity which at first seem separated,
one can consider the sacred life of ancient India, and observe how
it has gradually developed up to the present day. One knows that
what was characteristic of the India of primeval times is still true
at the present day. The feelings, the thoughts and conceptions have
been maintained that we find in this region in ancient times. It is
remarkable that in these civilizations there have been preserved an
image of primeval times, and when we consider what has been
maintained up to our own day we are looking, so to say, at the same
time into the remote past.

Now we do not progress very far in our understanding of the
different peoples on earth if we begin by only applying our own
moral standards. For this reason let us for the moment exclude what
might be said about the moral things of those times and only
inquire: What has developed from these characteristics of venerable
ancient Indian civilization?

We find, to begin with, what may be described as "devotion to the
spiritual," most highly honoured and held sacred. This devotion to
the spiritual was the more highly valued and counted sacred, the
more the human being was able to sink into himself, to live quietly
within himself and, apart from all that man can attain on the
physical plane, to direct the best in him to the spiritual worlds.
We find this cultivation, this dedication of the soul to the
foundations of existence as the highest duty of those who belonged
or belong to the highest caste of Indian life, the Brahmans.

Nothing impresses the moral feelings of the Indian people more than
this turning to the Divine-Spiritual with a devotion which forgets
everything physical; an intensely deep introspection and
renunciation of self. The moral life of this people is permeated by
a devotion which controls every thought and action. This is apparent
from the fact that those who belonged to other castes looked upon it
as natural, especially in ancient times, that the caste of religious
life and devotion and the life of ritual should be considered as
something apart and worthy of reverence. That which underlies this
cannot be understood by means of the common principles of morality
laid down by philosophy, for at the period when these feelings and
impulses developed in ancient India they were impossible among other
peoples. In order that these tendencies could develop with such
intensity both the temperament and fundamental character of the
Indian people were required. As civilization proceeded, emanating
from India they spread abroad over the rest of the earth. If we wish
to understand what is meant by the Divine-Spiritual we must go to
this original source.

Let us now turn our attention away from this people and direct it
towards Europe. Let us consider the peoples of Europe before
Christianity had affected European culture very much, when it had
only begun to spread in the West. You all know that Christianity
spreading into Europe from the East and South was confronted by the
peoples of Europe, who possessed certain tendencies, a definite
inner worth and definite forces. One who studies with spiritual
means the history of the introduction of Christianity into Central
Europe and also here in the North, knows at what cost the balance
was struck between this or that Christian impulse and what was
brought to meet it from Northern and Central Europe.

And now let us inquire --- as we have already done in the case of
the Indian people --- "What were the most characteristic moral
forces brought to Christianity as a moral possession, a moral
heritage, by the peoples whose successors form the present European
population, especially the population of the North, Central Europe
and England?" We need only mention a single one of the principal
virtues, and we know at once that we are expressing something which
is truly characteristic of these Northern and Mid-European
peoples.---With the word "valour," or "bravery," we have named the
chief virtue brought by the Europeans to Christianity; and the whole
of the personal human force was exercised in order to actualize in
the physical world what the human being intends from his innermost
impulse. Intrinsically the further we go back to ancient times the
more we find this to be the case --- the other virtues are
consequent upon this.

If we examine real valour in its fundamental quality, we find that
it consists of an inner fullness of life which is practically
inexhaustible, and this fullness of life was the most salient
characteristic among the ancient peoples of Europe. Ancient
Europeans possessed within them more valour than they could use for
themselves. Quite instinctively, they followed the impulse to spend
that of which they had a superabundance. One might even say that
they were wasteful in pouring out their moral wealth, their fitness,
and ability into the physical world. It was really as if among the
ancient people of Northern Europe each one had brought with him a
superfluity of force which was more than he needed for his own
personal use; this he was therefore able to pour forth in an excess
of prodigality and to use it for his warlike deeds. Modern ideas now
consider these self-same warlike deeds, which were the outcome of
ancient virtue, to be a relic of the past, and in fact they are
classed as vices; but the man of ancient Europe used them in a
chivalrous, magnanimous manner. Generous actions were characteristic
of the peoples of ancient Europe, just as actions springing from
devotion were characteristic of the people of ancient India.

Principles, theoretical moral axioms, would have been useless to the
peoples of ancient Europe, for they would have evinced little
understanding for them. Preaching moral sermons to a person of
ancient Europe would have been like giving one who does not like
reckoning the advice that he ought to write down his receipts and
expenditures with great accuracy. If he does not like this, the
simple fact remains that he need not keep accounts, for he possesses
enough for his expenditure and can do without careful bookkeeping if
he has an inexhaustible supply. This circumstance is not
unimportant. Theoretically it holds good with regard to what the
human being considers of value in life, regarding personal energy
and ability, and it also applies to the moral feelings of the
inhabitants of ancient Europe. Each one had brought with him a
divine legacy, as it were; he felt himself to be full of it, and
spent it in the service of his family, his clan or his people. That
was their mode of active trading and working.

We have now characterized two great sections of humanity which were
quite different from one another, for the feeling of contemplation
natural to the Indians did not exist among Europeans. For this
reason it was difficult for Christianity to bring a feeling of
devotion to the latter people, for their character and
predispositions were entirely different. And now after considering
these things --- putting aside all the objections which might be
raised from the standpoint of a moral concept --- let us inquire
into the moral effect. It does not require much reflection to know
that this moral effect was extremely great when these two ways of
looking at the world, these two trends of feeling met in their
purest form. The world has gained infinitely much by what could only
be obtained through the existence of a people like the ancient
Indians, among whom all feeling was directed to devotion to the
Highest. Infinitely much it has also gained from the valiant deeds
of the European peoples of early pre-Christian times. Both these
qualities had to cooperate, and together they yielded a certain
moral effect. We shall see how the effect of the ancient Indian
virtue as well as that of the ancient Germanic peoples can still be
found today; how it has benefited not only a part but the whole of
humanity, and we shall see how it still exists in all that men look
up to as the highest.

So without further discussion, we may assert that something which
produces this moral effect for humanity is good. Doubtless, in both
streams of civilization it must be so. But if we were to ask: what
is "goodness"? we are confronted once more by a puzzling question.
What is the "good" which has been active in each of these cases? I
do not wish to give you moral sermons, for this I do not consider my
task. It is much more my task to bring before you the facts which
lead us to an anthroposophical morality. For this reason I have thus
far brought before you two systems of known facts, concerning which
I ask nothing except that you should note that the fact of devotion
and the fact of bravery produce definite moral effects in the
evolution of humanity. Let us now turn our attention to other ages.
If you look at the life of the present day with its moral impulses
you will naturally say: "We cannot practise today --- at least not
in Europe --- what the purest ideal of India demands, for European
civilization cannot be carried on with Indian devotion; but just as
little would it be possible to attain to our present civilization,
with the ancient praiseworthy valour of the people of Europe. It at
once becomes evident that deep in the innermost part of the moral
feelings of the European peoples there is something else. We must
therefore search out that something more in order to be able to
answer the question: What is goodness? What is virtue?

I have often pointed out that we have to distinguish between the
period we call the Graeco-Latin or fourth post-Atlantean age of
civilization and the one we call the fifth, in which we live at the
present time. What I have now to say regarding the nature of
morality is really intended to characterize the origin of the fifth
post-Atlantean age. Let us begin with something which, as it is
taken from poetry and legend, you may consider open to dispute; but
still it is significant of the way in which fresh moral impulses
became active and how they flowed into mankind when the development
of the fifth age gradually set in.

There was a poet who lived at the end of the 12th century and
beginning of 13th century. He died in the year 1213, and was called
Hartmann von Aue. He wrote his most important poem, entitled "Der
Arme Heinrich" (Poor Henry), in accordance with the way of thinking
and feeling prevalent in his day. This poem particularly addresses
what was thought about certain moral impulses among certain peoples
in certain circles. Its substance is as follows: --- Poor Henry once
lived as a rich knight --- for originally he was not poor Henry but
a duly installed knight --- who did not take into account that the
things of the physical world decay and are temporary; he lived only
for the day and thereby rapidly produced bad karma. He was thus
stricken with a form of leprosy; he went to the most celebrated
physicians in the world but none of them could help him, so
considering his life at an end he sold all his worldly possessions;
His disease preventing intercourse with his fellows, he lived apart
on a solitary farm, well taken care of by an old devoted servant and
daughter. One day the daughter and the whole household heard that
one thing alone could help the knight who had this destiny. No
physician, no medicines could help him, only when a pure virgin out
of pure love sacrificed her life for him would his health be
restored. In spite of all the exhortations of her parents and of the
knight Henry himself, something came over the daughter which made
her feel that it was imperative she should sacrifice herself. She
went with the knight to Salerno, the most celebrated school of
medicine of the day. She did not fear what the physicians required
of her; she was ready to sacrifice her life. But at the last moment
the knight refused to allow it, he prevented it and returned home
with her. The poem then tells us that when the knight returned home,
he actually began to recover and that he lived for a long time and
spent a happy old age with the one who had determined to save him.

Well, you may say that this is a poem and we need not take literally
the things here spoken of. But the matter becomes different when we
compare what Hartmann von Aue, the poet of the Middle Ages, wrote at
that time in his "Poor Henry\" with something that really happened
and is well known. We may compare what Hartmann wrote with the life
of Francis of Assisi, who was born in the year 1182 and lived in
Italy.

In order to describe the moral nature contained in the personality
of Francis of Assisi, let us consider the matter as it appears to
the spiritual investigator or occultist, even though we may be
looked upon as foolish and superstitious. These things must be taken
seriously, because at that period of transition they were producing
such momentous effects.

We know that Francis of Assisi was the son of the Italian merchant
Bernardone, and his wife. Bernardone travelled a great deal in
France, where he carried on his business. We also know that the
father of Francis of Assisi was a man who set great store on outer
appearances. His mother was a woman possessing the virtue of piety,
having fine qualities of heart, and living devoutly according to her
religious feelings. Now the things recounted in the form of legends
about the birth and life of Francis of Assisi are entirely in
agreement with occult facts. Although occult facts are frequently
hidden by history in pictures and legends, these legends still
correspond with them. Thus it is quite true that before the birth of
Francis of Assisi quite a number of persons knew through revelation
that an important personality was about to be born. Historical
records show that one of the many people who dreamt --- that is, who
saw in prophetic vision --- that an important personality was about
to be born, was Saint Hildegarde. At this point I must emphasize
once more the truth of these facts, which can be corroborated by
investigations into the Akashic Record. She dreamt that there
appeared to her a woman whose face was smeared and covered with
blood, and this woman said to her: \"The birds have their nests here
upon earth, the foxes too have their holes, but at the present time
I have nothing, not even a stick upon which I can lean.\" When
Hildegarde awakened from this dream she knew that this personality
represented the true form of Christianity. And many other persons
dreamt in a similar manner. From the knowledge at their disposal
they saw that the outer order and institution of the church was
unfitted to be a receptacle, a covering, for the true Christianity.

One day, while Francis of Assisi\'s father was on business in France
--- this, again, is a fact --- a pilgrim went to Pica\'s house, to
the mother of Francis of Assisi, and said to her: "The child you are
expecting must not be brought into the world in this house, where
there is abundance; you must bring him to birth in the stable, for
he must lie upon straw and so follow after his Master!" This was
actually said to the mother of Francis of Assisi; and it is not
legend but truth that as the father was in France on business the
mother was able to carry this out, so that the birth of Francis of
Assisi actually took place in a stable and upon straw.

Another thing is also true: Some time after the child was born a
remarkable man came into the little town, a man who had never been
seen in that neighbourhood before and was never seen there again. He
went through the streets again and again saying \"An important
person has been born in this town.\" And those whose visionary life
was still active also heard the ringing of bells at the time of the
birth of Francis of Assisi.

Besides these few details a whole series of phenomena might be
adduced, but we shall content ourselves with the above, which are
only mentioned in order to show how significantly everything was
concentrated from the spiritual world, regarding the advent of a
single personality in that age.

All this becomes especially interesting when in addition we consider
something else. The mother had the peculiar impression that the
child ought to be called "John" and he was therefore given this
name. However, when the father returned from France where he had
done good business, he changed it and gave his son the name of
Francis, as he wished to commemorate his successful journey. But
originally the child was called John.

Now we need only draw attention to a few details from the life of
this remarkable man, especially from his youth. What sort of a
person was Francis of Assisi as a youth? He was one who conducted
himself like a descendant of the old Germanic knights, and this need
not appear remarkable when we consider how peoples had intermingled
after the immigrations from the North. Brave, warlike, filled with
the ideal of winning honour and fame with the weapons of war; it was
this which existed as a heritage, as a racial characteristic in the
personality of Francis of Assisi.

There appeared in him more externally, one might say, the qualities
which existed more as an inward quality of soul in the ancient
Germans, for Francis of Assisi was a "spendthrift." He squandered
the possessions of his father, who was at that time a rich man. He
gave freely to all his comrades and playfellows. No wonder that on
all the childish warlike expeditions he was chosen as leader by his
comrades, and that he was looked upon as a truly warlike boy, for he
was known as such throughout the whole town. Now there were all
sorts of quarrels between the youths of the towns of Assisi and
Perugia; he also took part in these and it came about that on one
occasion he and his comrades were taken prisoners. He not only bore
his captivity patiently and in a knightly way, but he encouraged all
the others to do the same until a year later they were able to
return home.

Afterwards, when in the service of chivalry, a necessary expedition
was going to be undertaken against Naples, he had a vision in a
dream. He saw a great palace and everywhere weapons and shields. Up
to the time of his dream he had only seen all kinds of cloth in his
father\'s house and place of business. So he said to himself, this
is a summons for me to become a soldier, and he thereupon decided to
join the expedition. On the way there and still more distinctly
after he had joined the expedition, he had spiritual impressions. He
heard something like a voice which said "Go no further, you have
wrongly interpreted the dream picture which is very important to
you. Go back to Assisi and you shall there hear the right
interpretation!"

He obeyed these words, went back to Assisi, and behold, he had
something like an inner dialogue with a being who spoke to him
spiritually and said, "Not in external service have you to seek your
knighthood. You are destined to transform all the forces at your
disposal into powers of the soul, into weapons forged for your use.
All the weapons you saw in the palace signify the spiritual weapons
of mercy, compassion and love. The shields signify the reasoning
powers which you have to exercise to stand firmly in the trials of a
life spent in deeds of mercy, compassion and love." Then followed a
short though dangerous illness, from which, however, he recovered.
After that he passed through something like a retrospection of the
whole of his life and in this he lived for several days. The young
knight who in his boldest dreams had only longed to become a great
warrior was transformed into a man who now most earnestly sought all
the impulses of mercy, compassion and love. All the forces he had
thought of using in the service of the physical world were
transformed into moral impulses of the inner life.

Here we see how a moral impulse evolves in a single personality. It
is important that we should study a great moral impulse, for though
the individual cannot always raise himself to the greatest ethical
heights, yet he can only learn of them where he sees them most
radically expressed and acting with the greatest forcefulness. It is
precisely by turning our attention to the greatest and most
characteristic manifestations of moral impulses, and then by
considering the lesser ones in their light that we can attain to a
correct view of moral impulses active in life.

But what happened next to Francis of Assisi? It is not necessary to
describe the disputes with his father when he became prodigal in an
entirely different manner. His father\'s home was well known for its
lavish hospitality and wastefulness --- for that reason his father
could understand his son\'s extravagance, but he could not
understand him after the radical change he had undergone, when he
laid aside his best clothes and even his necessities and gave them
to those in need. Nor could he understand his son\'s frame of mind,
when he said, "How remarkable it is that those through whom in the
West Christianity has received so much are so little respected," and
then Francis of Assisi made a pilgrimage to Rome and laid a large
sum of money on the graves of the Apostles Peter and Paul. These
things his father did not understand. I need not describe the
discussions which then took place; I need only point out that in
them were concentrated all the moral impulses of Francis of Assisi.
These concentrated impulses had then transformed his bravery into
soul-forces, they had developed in such a manner that in his
meditations they produced a special conception, and appeared to him
as the Cross and upon it the Saviour. Under these conditions he felt
an inner personal relationship to the Cross and the Christ, and from
this there came to him the forces through which he could
immeasurably increase the moral impulses which now flowed through
him.

He found a remarkable use for what now developed in him. At that
time the horrors of leprosy had invaded many parts of Europe. The
church had discovered a strange cure for these lepers who were then
so numerous. The priests would call the lepers and say to them:
\"You are stricken with this disease in this life, but inasmuch as
you are lost to this life, you have been won for God, you are
dedicated to God.\" And the lepers were then sent away to places far
removed from mankind, where, lonely and shunned, they had to spend
the remainder of their lives.

I do not blame this kind of cure. They knew no better. But Francis
of Assisi knew a better one. I mention this because from actual
experience it will lead us to moral sources. You will see in our
next lectures why we are now mentioning these things. These moral
impulses led Francis of Assisi to search out lepers everywhere, and
not to be afraid of going about among them. And actually the leprosy
which none of the remedial agents at that time could cure, which
made it necessary that these people should be thrust out of human
society, this leprosy was healed in numberless cases by Francis of
Assisi, because he went to these people with the power which he
possessed through moral impulses, which made him fear nothing; it
rather gave him courage not only carefully to cleanse their wounds,
but to live with the lepers, to nurse them conscientiously, yea, to
kiss them and permeate them with his love.

The healing of Poor Henry by the daughter of his faithful servant is
not merely a poetic story, it expresses what actually occurred in a
great number of cases at that time through the historically
well-known personality of Francis of Assisi. Observe what really
took place. In a human being, in Francis of Assisi, there was a
tremendous store of psychic life in the shape of something which we
have found in the ancient peoples of Europe as bravery and valour,
which had been transformed into soul and spirit, and afterwards
acted psychically and spiritually. Just as in ancient times that
which had expressed itself as courage and valour led to personal
expenditure of force, and manifested itself in Francis of Assisi in
his younger days as extravagance, so it now led him to become
prodigal of moral forces. He was full to overflowing with moral
force, and this actually passed over to those to whom he turned his
love.

Now try to realize that this moral force is a reality, just as much
a reality as the air we breathe and without which we cannot live. It
is a reality which flooded the whole being of Francis of Assisi, and
streamed from him into all hearts to which he dedicated himself, for
Francis of Assisi was prodigal of abundance of force which streamed
forth from him, and this is something which has streamed into and
intermingled with the whole of the mature life of Europe, which has
changed into a soul-force, and thus worked, as it were, in the world
of external reality.

Try to reflect upon these facts which at first may apparently have
nothing to do with the actual question of morality; try to grasp
what is contained in the devotion of the Indian and the valour of
the Norseman; reflect upon the healing effect of such moral forces
as were exercised by Francis of Assisi and then in our next lecture
we shall be able to speak about real, moral impulses and we shall
see that it is not merely words which give rise to morality, but
realities working in the soul.

Thanks to the [Rudolf Steiner Archive](https://rsarchive.org/)
