# Déjà Vu All Over Again

![](atomic.jpg){class="a"}

## By [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

He's our very own emperor from hell, an updated version of Nero who, [in
legend](https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/neros-rome-burns),
burned down Rome on a whim, though ours prefers drowning Washington. 
Why, just the other day, Donald Trump --- and you knew perfectly well
who I meant --- bent the ears of 250 top Republican donors for 84
minutes. Among other things, he assured those all-American ([not
Russian](https://robertreich.substack.com/p/comparing-russian-and-american-oligarchs?s=r))
oligarchs --- and let me [quote him in the
](https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2022/03/06/trump-focuses-foreign-policy-speech-gops-top-donors/)[*Washington
Post*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2022/03/06/trump-focuses-foreign-policy-speech-gops-top-donors/)
on this --- that "'the global warming hoax, it just never ends...' He
mocked the concept of sea levels rising, disputing widely held science.
'To which I say, great, we have more waterfront property.'"

[]{#anchor}Admittedly, he's talking about flooded property, including
possibly [whole
cities](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/10/29/climate/coastal-cities-underwater.html)
going
[underwater](https://www.thenation.com/article/environment/florida-flooding-miami/)
in the decades to come, but what the hell! Yes, indeed, he was the
president of the United States not so long ago and, if all goes well
(for him, not us), he or some
[doppelganger](https://www.wesh.com/article/cpac-poll-desantis-trump/39227728),
could win the Oval Office again in 2024, ensuring the arrival of that
new, all-too-wet *water*front property.  And yes, he offered up that
little gem --- about the [9,000th
time](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-51213003) he's called
climate change a "hoax" (sometimes [blaming
it](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2016/jun/03/hillary-clinton/yes-donald-trump-did-call-climate-change-chinese-h/)
on China) --- just as a new scientific report came out suggesting that,
if things don't improve in fossil-fuel-burning terms, up to half of the
Amazon rain forest, one of the great carbon sinks on Earth, could be
transformed into savanna. To [quote the
](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2022/03/07/amazon-rainforest-tipping-point-climate/)[*Washington
Post*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2022/03/07/amazon-rainforest-tipping-point-climate/)
again:

> []{#anchor-1}"The warming consequences of suddenly losing half the
> rainforest would be felt thousands of miles away and for centuries
> into the future, scientists warn. It would mean escalating storms and
> worsening wildfires, chronic food shortages and nearly a foot of sea
> level rise inundating coastal communities. It could trigger other
> tipping points, such as the melting of ice sheets or the disruption of
> the South American monsoon."

Hey, Donald, what could possibly go wrong on this all-too-embattled
planet of ours?

Of course, at this moment, three of the four [largest greenhouse gas
emitters](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/092915/5-countries-produce-most-carbon-dioxide-co2.asp),
Russia, the U.S. (which is [now
allowing](https://biologicaldiversity.org/w/news/press-releases/new-data-biden-slays-trumps-first-year-drilling-permitting-by-34-2022-01-21/)
more drilling for oil and gas than even during Trump's presidency), and
China, are locked in what could only be thought of as a deadly embrace
over Vladimir Putin's disastrous invasion of Ukraine. And the grim war
the Russian president launched seems [likely to
guarantee](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/mar/09/ukraine-climate-scientist-russia-invasion-fossil-fuels)
yet more [fossil-fuel
use](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/mar/10/oil-and-gas-companies-are-looking-at-a-bonanza-from-the-ukraine-war)
on a planet that needs so much less of it, even as he also put the issue
of nuclear war back on the table for the first time since the Cold War
ended.  How appropriate, if you're heading into Cold War II to once
again raise the possibility --- forget about the [next
Chernobyl](https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2022/03/ukraine-russia-chernobyl-warning/623878/)
--- of turning World War III into a [nuclear
one](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2022/02/25/coming-to-terms-with-the-nuclear-risks-of-the-ukraine-war/).

At this point, if you don't mind a genuine understatement, what a
strange planet we now live on.

**World's End, Property of...?**

Once upon a time, whatever your religion, Armageddon was the property of
the gods; until August 6, 1945, that is, when a lone B-29 bomber, the
*Enola Gay* (named after its pilot's mother), dropped the first atomic
bomb on the city of Hiroshima, essentially obliterating it.

Thought of another way, however, we humans took the power to end the
world (at least as we've known it) out of the hands of the gods in the
nineteenth century when the fossil-fuel based industrialization of
Planet Earth began in earnest in Great Britain. In other words, credit
our cleverness. In the space of a mere 200 or so years, we've developed
two different ways of devastating or even ending our life on this
planet. Consider that a genuine accomplishment for humanity.

As it happens, recent nuclear and climate-change news should have
brought that reality to mind again.  But before I even get to Vladimir
Putin, the invasion of Ukraine, and the latest report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), let me mention that,
more or less any week, there's a new study (or two or three) of our
climate future suggesting ever more extreme peril for us in the decades
(or even months) to come: ever fiercer
[droughts](https://www.npr.org/2022/02/14/1080302434/study-finds-western-megadrought-is-the-worst-in-1-200-years),
intensifying
[heat](https://theconversation.com/heat-waves-hit-the-poor-hardest-a-new-study-calculates-the-rising-impact-on-those-least-able-to-adapt-to-the-warming-climate-175224),
more extreme
[wildfires](https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-60483431), more
melting
[ice](https://www.sciencenews.org/article/antarctica-thwaites-glacier-ice-shelf-collapse-climate-5-years),
and ever rising [sea
levels](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2022/02/15/sea-level-rise-2050-climate/).

Of course, like the rest of us, you already know that story, right? And
of one thing you can be sure, the next scientific study, whatever it is,
will only offer [yet more
extreme](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/feb/28/ipcc-issues-bleakest-warning-yet-impacts-climate-breakdown)
climate news (with the [rarest of
exceptions](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2022/02/23/warming-timeline-carbon-budget-climate-science/)). 
In fact, I had barely begun writing notes for this piece when that IPCC
study arrived on the scene with, of course, the latest round of dreadful
news about where we're heading --- to a potentially "irreversible" hell
in a handbasket, natch. U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres [called
it](https://news.un.org/en/story/2022/02/1112852) a "code red for
humanity," lamenting that the evidence it details was unlike anything he
had ever seen on the subject and describing it as an "atlas of human
suffering and a damning indictment of failed climate leadership."

Damning indeed on a planet where, even before the Ukrainian nightmare,
it was obvious that key leaders were doing anything but greening this
world fast enough for the health of humanity.  And that, of course, is
just the background against which all of us now operate, whether we
think about it or not --- and in the midst of [events in
](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/mar/09/ukraine-climate-scientist-russia-invasion-fossil-fuels)[Ukraine](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/mar/09/ukraine-climate-scientist-russia-invasion-fossil-fuels),
it's not being given much thought at all --- on a planet going to...
well, why insult "the dogs"?

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1644211106/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Which brings me back to Vladimir Putin.  The strange thing about that
other form of planetary suicide, atomic weaponry, is that, since at
least the end of the Cold War, it's generally not been on the table (so
to speak) or much in the news.  Yes, in the Trump years, the president
did implicitly threaten to rain nuclear hell on North Korea --- he
called it "[fire and
fury](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-40869319)" --- and, at
one point, [spoke
of](https://tomdispatch.com/nick-turse-america-s-plans-to-win-the-afghan-war/)
ending the Afghan War with just such a strike, but most of the time from
1990 to late last night, nuclear weapons (Iran, which didn't have them,
aside) simply weren't part of the conversation.

Now, don't get me wrong.  In those same decades, nuclear arsenals only
spread and grew.  [Nine
countries](https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/Nuclearweaponswhohaswhat)
now possess such weaponry and the three great powers on the planet ---
the U.S., China, and Russia --- have all been hard at work. Russia has
been
"[modernizing](https://thebulletin.org/premium/2022-02/nuclear-notebook-how-many-nuclear-weapons-does-russia-have-in-2022/)"
its vast arsenal and China [moving
rapidly](https://www.businessinsider.com/why-china-is-rapidly-expanding-its-nuclear-arsenal-2022-1)
to build up its own.

Since Barack Obama's presidency, the U.S. military-industrial complex
has also been --- and, yes, this is indeed the term often used ---
"modernizing" its already mind-boggling arsenal to the tune of [\$1.7
trillion](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7)
to [\$2 trillion
dollars](https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/USNuclearModernization)
over three decades.  That includes, for instance, a new intercontinental
ballistic missile known as the Ground-Based Strategic Deterrent that,
it's already estimated, will take [at least 264
billion](https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/does-us-military-really-need-264-billion-nuclear-missile-180232)
of our tax dollars over its lifetime (and that's before the cost
overruns even begin!).  Keep in mind that this country already had an
unmodernized arsenal all too capable of destroying this planet many
times over into the distant future. With [our
1,357](https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/Nuclearweaponswhohaswhat)
deployed nuclear weapons (3,750, if you count the "inactive" ones),
including land-based nuclear missiles, those transported by strategic
bombers, and our nuclear subs wandering the world's waters with their
own devastating nukes on board, global destruction would be a given.

With all that activity long underway to remarkably little attention,
nuclear weapons --- and apocalyptic possibilities --- have once again
hit the headlines thanks to Vladimir Putin. After all, as his troops
headed into Ukraine, he suddenly and all too publicly issued a directive
putting his nuclear forces on "[high
alert](https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-kyiv-business-europe-moscow-2e4e1cf784f22b6afbe5a2f936725550)"
and
[offered](https://www.cbc.ca/news/world/putin-ukraine-nato-nuclear-weapons-1.6362890)
this gem to the world:

> "Whoever tries to hinder us, and even more so, to create threats to
> our country, to our people, should know that Russia's response will be
> immediate. And it will lead you to such consequences that you have
> never encountered in your history."

To make his point even clearer, he promptly
[oversaw](https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/27/putin-as-part-of-a-test-authorized-the-launch-of-four-nuclear-capable-ballistic-missiles-report.html)
the test launching of four nuclear-capable ballistic missiles. Since the
U.S. still has plenty of tactical nuclear weapons [based in
Europe](https://www.thenation.com/article/world/ukraine-russia-nuclear-threat/),
consider us once again, as in the original Cold War, on edge and in a
nuclear stand-off. Meanwhile, in Ukraine, the Russians threaten to
repeat, of all things, the [Chernobyl
disaster](https://world-nuclear.org/information-library/safety-and-security/safety-of-plants/chernobyl-accident.aspx)
by
[taking](https://www.npr.org/2022/03/08/1085099940/russias-seizure-of-nuclear-power-plant-raises-international-concerns)
the nuclear plants they once set up and serviced there in a wartime
blaze of horror.  One has already been captured under [hair-raising
circumstances](https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-war-nuclear-plant-attack-33b6c1709dee937750f95c6786832840).

Looking back, maybe the strangest thing of all is that most Americans,
maybe most people on the planet, essentially forgot about nukes.  In
retrospect, you have to wonder how that was ever possible, especially if
you're my age and remember [ducking and
covering](https://www.google.com/search?q=duck+and+cover&client=firefox-b-1-d&sxsrf=APq-WBuf5s707WwWnjG4rJRwuM_NGbeiFA:1646871686682&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjYx_-Oo7r2AhWHkIkEHSxPDBQQ_AUoAnoECAIQBA&biw=1920&bih=942&dpr=1#imgrc=g422Y0O9LzxYbM)
at school in repeated nuclear test drills, while the media of that time
[focused](https://buffalonews.com/news/panic-rooms-the-fear-of-fallout-in-the-50s-left-the-nations-back-yards-and/article_af1b89f5-310a-5824-b4cd-e913cba420e4.html)
on whether people should share their personal nuclear shelters with
their friends and neighbors. And mind you, that was in the years when,
in reality, Russian nuclear weapons couldn't yet reach this country
(though the U.S. already had the ability to devastate the communist
world).

Here, then, is a strange irony: in the years when we were most truly
paying attention, they couldn't have done anything to us. Once they
truly could, we essentially began forgetting those weapons. Now,
however, the potential destruction of humanity is back on the table ---
and this time around, brilliantly enough, in two different ways.

**Green What?**

Believe me, when you've been on this planet for 77 years, you feel like
you've seen everything.  And then, of course, it turns out that you
haven't. Not by a long shot. Not faintly. At 14, my grandfather, a Jew,
ran away from his home in the city of Lemberg when it was still part of
the Austro-Hungarian empire.  Between World Wars I and II, it was called
Lvov and belonged to Poland.  During that second great war, the Jewish
population there was
[slaughtered](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lviv_pogroms_(1941)) by the
Nazis.  Since the end of that nightmarish war, it's been known as Lviv
and it's been part of Ukraine, or rather, if Vladimir Putin has his way,
the place that until recently was known as Ukraine. As a result, Lviv is
again [in the
news](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/05/world/europe/lviv-ukraine-war-russia.html),
big time.

I mean, invading Ukraine at this moment?  How truly mad.  It's still
hard to take in what's happening, including the [million-plus
children](https://www.newsweek.com/nearly-half-ukraines-2-million-refugees-are-children-un-says-1686361)
who have already fled that country. Of course, ever more people are [in
motion](https://tomdispatch.com/war-torn/) on this planet today thanks
both to war and [climate
change](https://www.cnn.com/2020/09/10/world/climate-global-displacement-report-intl-hnk-scli-scn/index.html).
Yet, in a sense, there's really nowhere left to go, is there?

As it turns out, our leaders have done all too good a job of providing
options for ending the world.  I mean, in a century when it should be
hard not to know that, if the burning of fossil fuels isn't brought
under control, life as we've known it will cease to exist, two great
powers with preening, overweening leaders thought it made far more sense
to order their militaries to invade other countries based on lies. 
Because of that, cities were destroyed and deaths made all too
plentiful.  Vladimir Putin's ongoing invasion and destruction of Ukraine
has been denounced by much of the world led by Joe Biden's America. 
Russia is now experiencing potentially devastating sanctions**, **while
from
[sports](https://time.com/6151390/sports-russia-ukraine-f1-football/) to
[entertainment](https://variety.com/2022/biz/news/ukraine-russia-sanctions-hollywood-1235193807/)
to [fast
food](https://www.reuters.com/business/retail-consumer/mcdonalds-close-restaurants-russia-2022-03-08/),
much of the planet has been turning its back on Russia.

But here's the odd thing: Russia invaded its neighbor, which once indeed
had been part of the Soviet Union. The other great and invasive power I
had in mind struck two countries thousands of miles away --- Iraq (based
on [the
lie](https://www.juancole.com/2022/02/credibility-enabled-invasion.html)
that its autocratic ruler was developing nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction) and Afghanistan.  And yes, as the present conflict
will undoubtedly prove a catastrophe for Russia and the people of
Ukraine, so those wars proved disasters for the United States but even
more so for [Afghans and
Iraqis](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/WarDeathToll). 
Strangely enough, however, the world didn't condemn the U.S. for [its
acts](https://spectatorworld.com/topic/ukraine-invasion-nothing-compared-iraq-afghanistan/).
No sanctions were put in place.  No weaponry was sent to Afghans or
Iraqis to help them defend themselves against the occupying imperial
power.  And stranger yet, in retrospect, the present president of the
United States, then a senator, voted to invade Iraq and subsequently
even [developed a
plan](https://theintercept.com/2019/09/06/joe-biden-defends-record-iraq-including-plan-divide-along-sectarian-lines/)
to divide that U.S.-occupied country into three different states.

And so it goes on this endangered planet of ours, while the greenhouse
gasses from unending fossil-fuel burning invade our atmosphere with
devastating effect, yet create next to no headlines at all.

**Armageddon-Makers**

Today, 76 years after World War II ended (I was 1 at the time), the
heartland of Europe is again embroiled in war, death, and destruction.
And more than three decades after the Cold War ended, the new tsar of
Russia, now a rickety petro-state with an economy [smaller than
Italy's](https://www.news18.com/news/world/russias-economy-is-surprisingly-tiny-heres-why-it-matters-so-much-to-you-4822895.html),
is responsible.

Confused yet?  Well, you should be on this god-forsaken planet of ours.

If you look at the American experience, whether in Vietnam, Iraq, or
Afghanistan (or the Russian experience in that same country), the one
thing you know is that this can't end well, not for Vladimir Putin or
Joe Biden or Donald Trump or the rest of us, not on a planet that
humanity insists on taking down.  A tip of my hat goes to the outraged
Russians who have [hit the
streets](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/06/4300-people-arrested-anti-war-protests-across-russia-decounce-vladimir-putin-war-ukraine)
to protest the war in Ukraine, as Americans
[did](https://tomdispatch.com/signage-of-the-times/) (myself included),
however briefly, in that spring of 2003 when the invasion of Iraq
loomed.

Given our world, we should all probably be in the streets now. I mean,
here we are heading into Cold War II, while facing the possibility of
World War III on a planet that, thanks to the way we live and produce
energy, is heading for hell. Think of climate change in its own way as
perhaps the equivalent of World War IV, though somehow, while Ukraine is
endlessly in the headlines, the climate emergency, no matter how
horrifying the news, remains in the shadows, even as the Republicans
[call
for](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-10591883/Republicans-tell-Biden-drill-America-ramp-oil-production.html)
yet more fossil-fuel drilling.

The peacing of Earth? Not likely. The greening of Earth?  Not likely
either, it seems.  In our own fashion, we have indeed taken the place of
ancient gods of every sort.  We are now the Armageddon-makers and, sadly
enough, it seems that we're just gearing up.

Copyright 2022 Tom Engelhardt

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A
](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[Nation
Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[*TomDispatch.com*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He is also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [*The
End of Victory
Culture*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth and latest book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

*Thanks to TomDispatch,com*

