Letters to the Editor

[Déjà Vu All Over Again](https://southerncrossreview.org/143/engelhardt-deja-vu.html) by Tom Engelhardt

Tom Engelhardt is one of the voices I always listened to and still do.
In this article, however, he forgot mentioning one important fact. That
is the nuclear first strike doctrine of the US hidden behind the words:
'The United States has refused to adopt a no first use policy', meaning
that the first strike doctrine has been and is the predominant American
military doctrine.

 In consequence, this means that Russia has lived all the years of
confrontation and one-sided economic warfare after the fall of the
Soviet Union with the fear that they could at any time, while the US had
a technological advantage, become the victims of an American attack.
When Putin put his nuclear forces on high alert, he just drew even with
what was already standard policy in the US.

 In addition to this, it were the US and NATO who first broke
international law by bombing Yugoslavian cities, creating Kosovo with
force (and without the follow-up of a promised plebiscite), invading
Iraq and bombing Libya without a valid UN mandate while breaking their
pledge not to enlarge NATO towards the Russian border. In addition, to
be valid, their newly invented doctrine R2P, 'responsibility to
protect', cannot be applied and accepted by only one partner in the
game.

International law and political pledges have since become empty words in
an ideological dit for dat. Anyone, looking clear minded at the origin
of Russia's military adventure will have to start here and not at the
date when Russia's soldiers crossed their borders. Independent of
present opinions, it is this which will be read in future history books.

 Wilhelm Klein

\*

Dear Southern Cross,

Certainly losing the Amazon forest would have a very negative impact on
human life around the world. Europeans travelled to the then new world
to escape the effects of deforestation in Europe. I dare say climates do
alter but sadly those who wish to prove that don\'t provide useful
evidence to support their claims. And now I find their is a big question
mark over the ability to detonate in a flash a whole day\'s energy from
a nuclear power station.

Robin Bate

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
[Esoteric Cosmology-2](https://southerncrossreview.org/143/steiner-cosmology-2.html) by Rudolf Steiner

Thank you for covering these lectures. I find it helpful - it took me a
long time to read Blavatsky\'s book : the language was so difficult to
grasp. But already I am put at ease and find what RS talks about more
clear.

Therese Osborne

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
[Renascence](https://southerncrossreview.org/143/renascence.html) by Edna St Vincent Millay

Thanks for publishing it. One of my dearest poems. 

Jenny Floch

\*

Great poem to share just now, Frank!

John Beck

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
[Reincarnation Blues](https://southerncrossreview.org/143/reincarnation-blues.html) by Frank Thomas Smith

Right on all accounts. Imagine a happy face emoji. So sorry I can't read
everything you bring forth; the world is in great turmoil and I feel
spread out to encompass all, whether I understand it or not. Love and
hugs from me, and thanks for updates. Kendall Weaver

\*

Love it Frank, love it!

The beauty of rhyming verse confronting our mortality works for me.

Cheers,

Ian McGillivray

\*

Good one! Needs a bitter-sweet guitar riff.

Raun G

Reincanation Blues Everywhere. Good one. Here is my reincarnation blues

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
[Way to the Universal Basic Income](https://southerncrossreview.org/143/adrian-ubi.html) by Frank Thomas Smith

I really loved your piece on Adrian\'s Way. Yes, by all means, let\'s
fight for the UBI Steiner\'s way. The donation part and the part on the
downgrading of the value are essential.

Warm regards from Spain,

Karina ZdB

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
[Esoteric Lessons] (https://southerncrossreview.org/143/steiner-cosmology-2.html) by Rudolf Steiner

These are the amazing lessons. How greatly they resound in our lives
today. Thank you for making them more available.

Kendall Weaver

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
