# The War Prayer

![](mark-twain-2.jpg){class="a"}

It was a time of great and exalting excitement. The country was up in
arms, the war was on, in every breast burned the holy fire of
patriotism; the drums were beating, the bands playing, the toy pistols
popping, the bunched firecrackers hissing and spluttering; on every hand
and far down the receding and fading spread of roofs and balconies a
fluttering wilderness of flags flashed in the sun; daily the young
volunteers marched down the wide avenue gay and fine in their new
uniforms, the proud fathers and mothers and sisters and sweethearts
cheering them with voices choked with happy emotion as they swung by;
nightly the packed mass meetings listened, panting, to patriot oratory
which stirred the deepest deeps of their hearts, and which they
interrupted at briefest intervals with cyclones of applause, the tears
running down their cheeks the while; in the churches the pastors
preached devotion to flag and country, and invoked the God of Battles,
beseeching His aid in our good cause in outpouring of fervid eloquence
which moved every listener. It was indeed a glad and gracious time, and
the half dozen rash spirits that ventured to disapprove of the war and
cast a doubt upon its righteousness straightway got such a stern and
angry warning that for their personal safety's sake they quickly shrank
out of sight and offended no more in that way.

Sunday morning came --- next day the battalions would leave for the
front; the church was filled; the volunteers were there, their young
faces alight with martial dreams --- visions of the stern advance, the
gathering momentum, the rushing charge, the flashing sabers, the flight
of the foe, the tumult, the enveloping smoke, the fierce pursuit, the
surrender --- then home from the war, bronzed heroes, welcomed, adored,
submerged in golden seas of glory! With the volunteers sat their dear
ones, proud, happy, and envied by the neighbors and friends who had no
sons and brothers to send forth to the field of honor, there to win for
the flag, or, failing, die the noblest of noble deaths. The service
proceeded; a war chapter from the Old Testament was read; the first
prayer was said; it was followed by an organ burst that shook the
building, and with one impulse the house rose, with glowing eyes and
beating hearts, and poured out that tremendous invocation ---

> > *\"God the all-terrible! Thou who ordainest! Thunder thy clarion and lightning thy sword!\"*

Then came the \"long\" prayer. None could remember the like of it for
passionate pleading and moving and beautiful language. The burden of its
supplication was, that an ever-merciful and benignant Father of us all
would watch over our noble young soldiers, and aid, comfort, and
encourage them in their patriotic work; bless them, shield them in the
day of battle and the hour of peril, bear them in His mighty hand, make
them strong and confident, invincible in the bloody onset; help them to
crush the foe, grant to them and to their flag and country imperishable
honor and glory ---

An aged stranger entered and moved with slow and noiseless step up the
main aisle, his eyes fixed upon the minister, his long body clothed in a
robe that reached to his feet, his head bare, his white hair descending
in a frothy cataract to his shoulders, his seamy face unnaturally pale,
pale even to ghastliness. With all eyes following him and wondering, he
made his silent way; without pausing, he ascended to the preacher's side
and stood there waiting. With shut lids the preacher, unconscious of his
presence, continued with his moving prayer, and at last finished it with
the words, uttered in fervent appeal, \"Bless our arms, grant us the
victory, O Lord our God, Father and Protector of our land and flag!\"

The stranger touched his arm, motioned him to step aside --- which the
startled minister did --- and took his place. During some moments he
surveyed the spellbound audience with solemn eyes, in which burned an
uncanny light; then in a deep voice he said:

\"I come from the Throne --- bearing a message from Almighty God!\" The
words smote the house with a shock; if the stranger perceived it he gave
no attention. \"He has heard the prayer of His servant your shepherd,
and will grant it if such shall be your desire after I, His messenger,
shall have explained to you its import --- that is to say, its full
import. For it is like unto many of the prayers of men, in that it asks
for more than he who utters it is aware of --- except he pause and
think.

\"God's servant and yours has prayed his prayer. Has he paused and taken
thought? Is it one prayer? No, it is two --- one uttered, the other not.
Both have reached the ear of Him Who heareth all supplications, the
spoken and the unspoken. Ponder this --- keep it in mind. If you would
beseech a blessing upon yourself, beware! lest without intent you invoke
a curse upon a neighbor at the same time. If you pray for the blessing
of rain upon your crop which needs it, by that act you are possibly
praying for a curse upon some neighbor's crop which may not need rain
and can be injured by it.

\"You have heard your servant's prayer --- the uttered part of it. I am
commissioned of God to put into words the other part of it --- that part
which the pastor --- and also you in your hearts --- fervently prayed
silently. And ignorantly and unthinkingly? God grant that it was so! You
heard these words: 'Grant us the victory, O Lord our God!' That is
sufficient. The *whole *of the uttered prayer is compact into those
pregnant words. Elaborations were not necessary. When you have prayed
for victory you have prayed for many unmentioned results which follow
victory --- *must f*ollow it, cannot help but follow it. Upon the
listening spirit of God the Father fell also the unspoken part of the
prayer. He commandeth me to put it into words. Listen!

\"O Lord our Father, our young patriots, idols of our hearts, go forth
to battle --- be Thou near them! With them --- in spirit --- we also go
forth from the sweet peace of our beloved firesides to smite the foe. O
Lord our God, help us to tear their soldiers to bloody shreds with our
shells; help us to cover their smiling fields with the pale forms of
their patriot dead; help us to drown the thunder of the guns with the
shrieks of their wounded, writhing in pain; help us to lay waste their
humble homes with a hurricane of fire; help us to wring the hearts of
their unoffending widows with unavailing grief; help us to turn them out
roofless with their little children to wander unfriended the wastes of
their desolated land in rags and hunger and thirst, sports of the sun
flames of summer and the icy winds of winter, broken in spirit, worn
with travail, imploring Thee for the refuge of the grave and denied it
--- for our sakes who adore Thee, Lord, blast their hopes, blight their
lives, protract their bitter pilgrimage, make heavy their steps, water
their way with their tears, stain the white snow with the blood of their
wounded feet! We ask it, in the spirit of love, of Him Who is the Source
of Love, and Who is the ever-faithful refuge and friend of all that are
sore beset and seek His aid with humble and contrite hearts. Amen.\"

*(After a pause*.) \"Ye have prayed it; if ye still desire it, speak!
The messenger of the Most High waits!\"

It was believed afterward that the man was a lunatic, because there was
no sense in what he said.

\*\*\*

***About the Text*****: **According to Albert Bigelow Paine, whom Twain
named as his literary executor not long before he died, Twain dictated
\"The War Prayer\" in 1904-05 and intended it to be published then.
However, it was rejected by his publisher. Paine found it among Twain\'s
unpublished manuscripts after the writer\'s death in 1910. Paine
published the essay for the first time in 1923 in his collection,
*Europe and Elsewhere*. The text I present here follows Paine's 1923
text.

**Samuel Langhorne Clemens** (November 30, 1835Â -- April 21, 1910),known
by his [pen name](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pen_name) **Mark
Twain**, was an American writer,
[humorist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humorist), entrepreneur,
publisher, and lecturer. He was lauded as the \"greatest humorist the
United States has produced,\"and [William
Faulkner](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Faulkner) called him
\"the father of [American
literature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_literature)\". His
novels include [*The Adventures of Tom
Sawyer*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Adventures_of_Tom_Sawyer)
(1876) and its sequel, [*Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adventures_of_Huckleberry_Finn)
(1884) the latter of which has often been called the \"[Great American
Novel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_American_Novel)\".
