# Esoteric Cosmology - 2

![](big-bang.jpg){class="a"}

## Rudolf Steiner

**Translation: Frank Thomas Smith**

This is the second of three lectures given in the Berlin branch of the
Theosophical Society in 1904. Rudolf Steiner was the general secretary
of the German Theosophical Society until he broke with the Theosophists
in 1913 and formed the Anthroposophical Society. At that time Steiner
used theosophical terminology derived from oriental sources. He later
abandoned most of these terms in favor of German. This lecture was
published in German by the Rudolf Steiner Verlag, Dornach, Switzerland,
in 2001. It is based on notes taken by participants, none of whom was a
professional stenographer. This is the only English translation to my
knowledge. The first lecture may be found at [Esoteric Cosmology -
1](https://rsarchive.org/Lectures/19040526p01.html). The third lecture
will appear in the next issue of SCR, and at [Esoteric Cosmology -
3](https://rsarchive.org/Lectures/19040609p01.html). . \[Tr. -- FTS\]

After the introductory remarks last Thursday, I would like to begin by
giving you a sketch of world development according to theosophical
knowledge. I ask you to bear in mind that as there are only a few hours
available, I can only give a sketch in which much can only be briefly
indicated. There may be an opportunity later to elucidate further.

Before we pursue the history of the development of the universe and,
above all, the formation of our planet Earth, we must make our own
certain concepts that westerners no longer possess because they have
occupied themselves for so long with only physical phenomena. In every
book that deals with cosmology, we are told that we only need to look
into space to see thousands and thousands of worlds unveil themselves
before our eyes, worlds that are similar to our solar system, and that
our Earth, the planet on which life has existed for millions of years,
is like a particle of dust within these many worlds; and that man is
merely a tiny being on this particle of dust. Natural science has
considered this to be the case ever since the advent of the Copernican
theory. Science tells us how erroneous it was that man in ancient times
saw the Earth as the center of the universe and believed that cosmic
evolution was only a preparation for human existence. Science has
drummed into us how small the human being is compared to the universe,
that is was arrogant of man to believe that the world is fashioned the
way it is because of him. Schiller wrote the following beautiful words
against this way of thinking:

To the Astronomers

> > Don\'t blab so much to me about dust clouds and suns!\
> > Is nature so grand only because it lets you count?\
> > Your subject is surely the most sublime in space;\
> > But, friends, the sublime lives not in space.\

And Goethe, about whom you know from other lectures that he possessed
occult knowledge, expressed his thoughts about this point as follows:

> > "For what purpose would the world exist with its solar systems and stars if it didn\'t direct itself to the human being, so he could edify and be edified by it?"

So you see, people like these with their true spiritual world conception
could not be satisfied with the idea of the insignificance of man and
the dust particle nature of the universe.

Let us now consider the human being in relation to the history of
evolution from the theosophical point of view. I must, however,
anticipate this with some thoughts. Let\'s look for a moment at
contemporary humanity\'s standpoint concerning cosmology. Everything
that man can grasp with his senses --- be they the rough senses of daily
life or the more exact ones that natural science offers us by means of
its microscopes and analytical methods --- is ultimately merely the
exterior, physical human being. Those of you who have heard theosophical
lectures more often know that this exterior human being is only the
wrapping, the outer manifestation of the inner man. What is the inner
man actually? When you study the physical man anatomically, you find
that he is composed of various systems: the skeletal and muscle system,
the nervous system that has developed into the brain, and so forth. You
also know that the brain is the organ of thinking. As Theosophists you
also know that it isn\'t the brain that thinks, but that the brain is
only an instrument, that the brain only serves the true being of man as
a thinking instrument. This being who thinks in man cannot be discerned
with physical sense instruments; not even someone who has opened his
astral \[soul --- tr.\] senses can see it. A highly developed
clairvoyance is required in order to perceive what it is that thinks in
a human being. In a theosophical sense we call that which thinks in man
the true Self. This inner nucleus of being, this true Self, is spiritual
in nature. It isn\'t something that extends in space, nor does it flow
in time. It is timeless and spaceless, it exists beyond space and time,
it is eternal. You have heard a description of this Self in my lectures
about the Devachan \[spiritual world-tr.\], and you will find an exact
description in my forthcoming book,
[*Theosophy*](https://wn.rsarchive.org/Books/GA009/English/AP1971/GA009_index.html).

In order for the human being to live and think in the present stage of
evolution, the spiritual Self needs a physical brain. We could perceive
with this spiritual Self in the astral world and in the Devachan, or
mental world, without a physical brain, but in the outer, physical world
we can only perceive with the physical brain. If we wish to understand
contemporary man correctly, we must say: The contemporary human being is
a spiritual Self embodied in a physical brain. This physical brain had
to first originate, it had to develop; it isn\'t eternal as is the
spiritual Self. We can follow the spiritual Self back into infinitely
remote times, and forward into the infinite future. From a certain point
in time this spiritual Self clothed itself in a brain, created it,
formed this brain to correspond to its own being. Such an organ cannot
be formed just like that, however. It would be impossible for someone to
simply create a viable brain through some process or other. It would be
an artificial thing, but not a viable brain that could serve as an
instrument for a spirit. In order for a brain to arise, other organs had
to develop first. A brain can only develop in a physical body, such as
the human one. Therefore it was necessary that the evolution of the rest
of the physical body precede the brain instrument. When we look back on
the preceding evolutionary stages we see how slow and gradual this
process was. That the human being with his spiritual Self received such
an organ with which he can come to understand the world, that is the
goal and meaning of our present earthly development. Everything that has
happened since millions of years had as its goal that evolution reach
the point in which a brain can serve a spiritual Self.

Let us go back for a moment to the beginning of the earth\'s evolution.
He whose spiritual vision has been sufficiently trained will have the
following perception: At the beginning of our planetary evolution, our
spiritual Self had reached a certain stage in its evolution. Every one
of us was at a certain stage of evolution when the Earth was in its
germinal stage. You can think back to the time when the earth\'s
evolution began, and to all the spiritual Selfs that are incarnated
today on Earth. You were all there, not as you are now, but at a
completely different stage of evolution. During the Earth\'s evolution
we have a distinct task; the human being must became something through
this earthly evolution. Allow me to indicate in a descriptive way what
the spiritual Self was when it entered into earthly evolution. Our
spiritual Self had a completely different consciousness when it stood
before the gates of our earthly existence than it does now. We can
comprehend this if we imagine that we were dull dreamers who were not
able to turn the images that flew by us into concepts, but could only
see them as a panorama. Every individual spiritual Self had such a dream
consciousness, and it had to pass through earthly evolution and must
pass through future evolution in order to develop a bright, clear,
conceptual picture-consciousness. The dream-like consciousness in which
the spiritual Self was immersed at the start of earthly evolution is
comparable to that of the animal\'s, but the consciousness level is not
the same. The task our spiritual Self is to perform during the course of
this planetary period is that consciousness brightens more and more ---
and when we complete this earthly evolution in the distant future, we
will have brought this bright, clear consciousness to its zenith.

The beings who entered into earthly evolution at that time we call
*Pitris*, which mean "Fathers". We were those Pitris then; that was our
nature during that earlier phase of evolution. Before we entered into
earthly evolution, we passed through preliminary stages, and we worked
ourselves up to the dream-like Pitri stage. That is where we stood when
earthly evolution began. The Pitris had to gradually develop all the
organs they needed in order to become acquainted with and understand
their physical environment by means of a physical brain within the
physical corporality we know today. The last thing man had to accomplish
was to become a physical thinking being in order for his Self to be able
to think within the physical world.

Now I come to the second preliminary thought. When you examine the human
brain scientifically from all sides with the senses only, you will find
that it is composed of the same matter and is ruled by the same energy
as that of all other earthly physical systems. If you take a crystal, a
piece of limestone or rock-salt, a plant, an animal, and you examine
them chemically, you find that all physical nature, insofar as it is
seen with the eye and touched by the hand, consists of the same chemical
and physical energies --- those that are active in the mineral,
vegetable and animal kingdoms. Therefore, in order for the human being
to reach his present stage of evolution, he had to clothe his spiritual
Self with a physical body. That took a long time and the process is not
yet complete. In the future the human being will develop further in this
mineral wrapping. There are germinal organs in our bodies that are still
to develop, new senses that are now only present in outline. So you see,
the human being --- his spiritual Self --- needed a long time to clothe
himself in the physical body which he now has.

Let us go back to the time when the human spiritual Self began the work
of forging this mineral body, that can walk and stand, that possesses
growth and reproductive faculties, a nervous system and the kind of
brain a human needs. Go back to when all that was in a germinal stage,
and then go forward to a time when the human being will have reached his
highest point of evolution, when in the center of his head an organ will
have developed through which he will have other perceptions than those
we know today. In the segment of time between these two points flows the
mineral evolution of man. In Theosophy we call such a time segment a
"Round". The Round I have just described to you --- this evolutionary
segment --- we call the "Mineral Round".

Before the human being could form this body in order to create the
brain, however, he first had to prepare other parts of his being. The
spiritual Self, this purely spiritual entity, could not have managed
such a mineral body. Consider the spiritual Self as a point. And think
of the point as being inside a mechanism such as our body; this point
would never have been able to think by means of a physical brain.

So we have two things: we know that our spiritual Self had a dream-like
consciousness in the beginning, but could never have managed the
physical body. It had to create an intermediary in order to move its
body. How do I move my hand? I first have the thought: I want to move my
hand. If I only had the thought it would live in me, but it could never
raise up a physical hand, just as a mere thought could never lift up a
bottle, for example. If you want to move the bottle, energy must be
added to the thought, which is the intermediary between the thought and
my physical body. And we call this energy an astral \[soul\] energy.
This is an energy present in the astral world. I would not be able to
move my arm if there wasn\'t an astral energy in me that acts as
intermediary between my thought and my physical arm. There must be an
intermediary between my spiritual Self and my physical body and this
intermediary is an astral essence. If I move my leg or my hand, if I put
my brain into action in order to hatch thoughts --- my physical body
must be integrated with my thought through the astral organism.

You know from previous lectures that man has such an astral body that
the clairvoyant sees in its astral cloud, which we call the aura, and in
which his will and his desires live. When I have a thought, it alone is
powerless to act. If it is accompanied by a wish, the will, it becomes
an energy, a radiation, which is recognizable to the clairvoyant. The
human being had to create an astral body, a desire-body, which could be
the intermediary between his thoughts and his physical-mineral body,
before he built up the physical body he now has. Before the evolutionary
period, which I called the "Mineral Round", another evolutionary period
in which the astral body developed, had to precede it. We must therefore
go back to the period in which the astral body was prepared. Only then
could the physical-mineral body impregnate the astral body. This period,
that also had a beginning and an end-point, we call the "Astral Round".

As you can see, we have two "times". One is that in which we now live:
the mineral round. Another one preceded it: the astral round. But the
human astral body also required preparation. A certain method is
required to insert it into human nature. The astral body wasn\'t there
when we were born and will not be there a short time after we die. It
comes into being and it expires, it is subject to certain laws of
origination and expiration. Consider a child. The child\'s astral body
is correspondingly small; it grows according to the child\'s physical
growth. Growth and reproduction are functions of the mineral-physical
and the etheric \[vital or life-tr.\] essences of man. The human being
must develop in earthly life according to the laws of growth and
reproduction. That we are born and grow, that we survive at all, is not
due to our astral bodies. Only wishes, wants and desires reside in the
astral body. We are astral beings, just as animals are astral beings,
and with the plants and animals we have that essence in common which is
capable of bringing forth its own kind and making it grow from small to
large. To use another expression: it is the form-giving element. Our
physical and etheric bodies must have a very certain form when they are
born, and this form must grow. You can conceive of this better if you
take a seed \... \[gap in the manuscript\].

The forming energy is not an astral function. The astral can live within
this energy, but it must be formed first itself. The human astral body
could not have originated if another evolutionary period had not
preceded it --- the period in which the human form was prepared. Allow
me to call this period the "Formation Period"; in Theosophy it is called
the "Rupa-Round". It is the period in which the form of man was
prepared, so that his present form could develop.

All that we can observe in these three "rounds" are the wrappers for the
spiritual Self of man. During the mineral round the human being
"clothed" himself with the mineral wrapping. In the preceding period,
the astral round, the human being prepared the astral wrapping, and
during the period preceding that, the "rupa" or formation round, he
acquired the ability to give himself the form he needed to perceive,
think and act as a human being.

When we were still "Pitris", when we still lived in a dream-like
consciousness at the beginning of our earthly evolution, we were, if I
may use the expression, result, fruit. In a way similar to a plant that
grows from a seed planted in springtime in new earth, we had to prepare
ourselves in order to evolve on the earth. We were the result of another
world, and we had then to be the beginning of a completely new world, in
which we had to first find ourselves. Just as you receive a seed in the
autumn and let it rest over the winter, then plant it in new earth in
the spring, so acted the Pitri-natures. They had to be replanted in a
new environment, in the matter of the earthly world that was not present
in the previous planetary stages. In order for this to happen another
evolutionary period had to precede the one we just referred to. We now
arrive at a very ancient evolutionary period.

The farther back we go from the present, the harder it becomes to
imagine the conditions. The theosophist does not believe that he can go
back to the beginning of the world with his questions. When people hear
about Theosophy for the first time, they often ask: How did the world
begin? Mostly such questions are not answerable, for we cannot go back
to the very beginning of the world. You have seen the point in time
where we have come from the Pitri-nature. The clairvoyant can follow
this point in time by using certain methods. But the human being did not
originate there; he was already at a certain phase of evolution. The
theosophist does not speculate about this or indulge in abstract
concepts. He follows up his experiences, his intuitions in the
super-sensible region, and he describes his experiences insofar as he
has them. In the same way as a geographical investigator would only
describe what he has seen, say about Africa, and not what he has not
seen, so the theosophical investigator would not describe the beginning
of the world that lies very, very far back. The theosophist can only
follow a part of our evolution through experience and does not indulge
in speculation.

It was a seed that came from an earlier time into our evolution. Man was
a formless seed. We call this point in time the "Arupa-Round", the
formless round. Thus we have three time segments before the one we are
in now. We call these segments "Rounds". The first, second and third
rounds have gone by; we are now in the fourth round, and three more
rounds will follow in the future, of which we have still to speak. We
call the humans of the fourth round the humans of the mineral realm
because they were formed by mineral energy; and we call a human of the
previous round, the astral round, in which he formed his astral body, a
human of the third elemental realm. We differentiate the humans of the
third, second and first elemental realms. During the first elemental
realm, or the first round, men\'s thoughts moved in a formless
thought-matter. During the second elemental realm, or the second round,
human thoughts moved in a formed thought-matter. And in the third
elemental realm human thoughts could already form into wishes; they
could take on the form that we can follow as astral energy in the astral
world. Only in the fourth round is man advanced enough to dominate the
mineral realm. Just as in the third round he formed an astral brain from
astral matter, so in the fourth round he was advanced enough to form a
physical brain with which he could think.

Thus we have three elemental realms and the mineral realm. The human
being of the past lived in the three elemental realms. I can only hint
at what followed, but you will understand the analogy. Another round,
during which man will reach a still higher stage of evolution, will
follow our present one. He will then not only think with his physical
brain, but also with what we call astral energy. He will not only be
able to command physical matter, he will also be able to dominate astral
energy. I will give you an example for clarification. If I want to move
this glass from here to there, I need a physical intermediary --- my
hand. Man has advanced far enough in the fourth round that he can
consciously act in the physical, mineral world. He cannot yet, however,
consciously handle astral energy. He has not yet developed an astral
organ of will. He will be able to do so during the fifth round. In the
fifth round the human being will be able to command the astral world as
well as he now commands the physical world. He will be even more
advanced during the sixth round. He will then be able to command the
form-giving world, as he today commands the physical world, and in the
fifth round will command the astral world. In the fifth round he will
not only be able to realize a wish in the place where it is wished, but
will also be able to send a wish to distant places. In the sixth round
he will be able to form himself. After the sixth round our earthly
evolution will have reached its culmination, and by then the human being
will have taken unto himself all that he is able to learn on the Earth.

The human being has seven rounds to go through. I could only describe
these rounds approximately --- but we must be clear about this: During
our mineral round man and the earth were not always physical, but had to
evolve to that stage. They had to reach this stage in order to be
physically perceptible. From our mineral round we look back on previous
evolutionary stages. We can thereby conclude that there is a seven-stage
evolution of our Earth and that the spiritual Self has seven stages or
rounds to go through. During each of these seven rounds the spiritual
Self was in one of the nature realms. Look at the human being. He has
gone through the first, second, third elemental realms and finds himself
now in the fourth round, which is our contemporary world.

Next time I will show that during this fourth round it is only man who
has reached the mineral stage. Everything that is already mineral,
non-living natural matter such as crystals, rocks, and so on, already
reached the culmination of their evolution during the first round.
Plants reached the culmination of their evolution during the second
round, and today\'s animals reached their evolutionary culmination
during the third round. Man has reached his physical-mineral evolution
during the fourth round.

We see, therefore, that our Earth was preceded by another one millions
of years ago. Man first appeared in the first elemental realm. The plant
nature appeared during the second elemental realm. Then came the third
elemental realm and animals were included in earthly evolution. The
human being as such was, however, still an astral being, not yet able to
descend to a physical incarnation. Only during the fourth round, when
minerals, plants and animals already existed, was man able to descend to
a physical incarnation. Therefore, in the four rounds we have four
coexisting realms: the mineral realm in the first round, the plant realm
in the second round, the animal realm in the third realm and the human
realm in the fourth round. The human realm had sent out the three other
preparatory realms in advance. Goethe was right when he said: "What
would nature amount to if it weren\'t directed towards man?" The great
cosmic event had to occur; the human being had to evolve through three
realms in order to take on a mineral form during the fourth round. The
human being was the co-creator in invisible form. As "Pitri" he came
from another evolutionary stage. We worked with our dream-like
consciousness during the first round. We worked in the preparation of
our Earth in order that a realm could be formed that would be the
foundation of our evolution.

That is the path of evolution up until now. We will continue next time.
