# What Will We Remember of 2022?

![](america-decline.jpg){class="alarge"}

### Nation (Un)Building and Planet (Un)Building, American-Style

## By Tom Engelhardt

Let me start 2022 by heading back \-- way, way back \-- for a moment.

It\'s easy to forget just how long this world has been a dangerous place
for human beings. I thought about this recently when I stumbled upon a
little memoir my Aunt Hilda scrawled, decades ago, in a small notebook.
In it, she commented in passing: \"I was graduated during that horrible
flu epidemic of 1919 and got it.\" Badly enough, it turned out, to mess
up her entry into high school. She says little more about it.

[]{#anchor}Still, I was shocked. In all the years when my father and his
sister were alive and, from time to time, talked about the past, never
had they (or my mother, for that matter) mentioned the disastrous
"[Spanish
Flu](https://www.history.com/news/why-was-it-called-the-spanish-flu)"
pandemic of 1918-1920. I hadn't the slightest idea that anyone in my
family had been affected by it. In fact, until I read John Barry's 2005
book, [**The Great
Influenza**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0143036491/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
I hadn't even known that a pandemic devastated America (and the rest of
the world) early in the last century --- in a fashion remarkably similar
to, but even worse than, Covid-19 (at least so far) before essentially
being tossed out of history and the memory books of most families.

That should stun anyone. After all, at that time, possibly [50
million](https://www.archives.gov/exhibits/influenza-epidemic/) people
died of the waves of that dreaded disease, often in horrific ways, and,
even in this country, were sometimes buried in [mass
graves](https://www.washingtonpost.com/history/2020/09/01/1918-flu-pandemic-end/).
Meanwhile, some of the controversies we've experienced recently over,
for instance,
[masking](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/03/us/mask-protests-1918.html)
went on in a similarly bitter fashion then, before that global disaster
was chucked away and forgotten. Almost no one I know whose parents lived
through that nightmare had heard anything about it while growing up.

**Ducking and Covering**

My aunt's brief comment was, however, a reminder to me that we've long
inhabited a perilous world and that, in certain ways, it's only grown
more so as the decades have passed. It also left me thinking about how,
as with that deathly flu of the World War I era, we often forget (or at
least conveniently set aside) such horrors.

After all, in my childhood and youth, in the wake of the nuclear
destruction of
[Hiroshima](https://tomdispatch.com/nick-turse-one-hundred-seconds-till-the-apocalypse/)
and
[Nagasaki](https://tomdispatch.com/susan-southard-against-forgetting/),
this country began building a staggering nuclear arsenal and would soon
be followed on that path by the Soviet Union. We're talking about
weaponry that could have destroyed this planet many times over and, in
those tense Cold War years, it sometimes felt as if such a fate might
indeed be ours. I can still remember
[hearing](https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/cuban-missile-crisis)
President John F. Kennedy on the radio as the Cuban Missile Crisis of
1962 began --- I was a freshman in college --- and thinking that
everyone I knew on the East Coast, myself included, would soon be toast
(and we [almost
were](https://tomdispatch.com/noam-chomsky-the-most-dangerous-moment-50-years-later/)!).

To put that potential fate in perspective, keep in mind that, only two
years earlier, the U.S. military had
[developed](https://tomdispatch.com/jon-else-on-the-museum-of-attempted-suicide/)
a [Single Integrated Operational
Plan](https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB130/index.htm) for nuclear
war against the Soviet Union and China. In it, a first strike of 3,200
nuclear weapons would be "delivered" to 1,060 targets in the Communist
world, including at least 130 cities. If all went "well," those would
have ceased to exist. Official estimates of casualties ran to 285
million dead and 40 million injured --- and, given what wasn't known
about the effects of radiation then, not to speak of the "[nuclear
winter](http://climate.envsci.rutgers.edu/pdf/RobockToonSciAmJan2010.pdf)"
such an attack would have created on this planet, that was undoubtedly a
grotesque underestimate.

When you think about it now (if you ever do), that plan and --- to steal
[Jonathan
Schell's](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0394525590/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
famed phrase --- the fate of the earth that went with it should still
stun you. After all, until August 6, 1945, Armageddon had been left to
the gods. In my youth, however, the possibility of a human-caused,
world-ending calamity was hard to forget --- and not just because of the
Cuban Missile Crisis. In school, we took part in nuclear drills
("[ducking and
covering](https://i1.wp.com/reinventingcivildefense.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/duck-and-cover.jpg?ssl=1)"
under [our desks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IKqXu-5jw60)), just as
we did fire drills, just as today most schools conduct [active-shooter
drills](https://www.nea.org/advocating-for-change/new-from-nea/unannounced-active-shooter-drills-scaring-students-without),
fearing the possibility of a mass killing on the premises. Similarly,
while out walking, you would from time to time pass [the
symbol](https://www.orau.org/health-physics-museum/collection/civil-defense/miscellaneous/fallout.html)
for a nuclear shelter, while the media regularly reported on people
[arguing](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/a-fallout-shelter-might-have-caused-you-to-fall-out-with-your-neighbors/2020/11/04/9fa320c6-1ebb-11eb-ba21-f2f001f0554b_story.html)
about whether, in the case of a nuclear alert, to let their neighbors
into their private backyard shelters or arm themselves to keep them out.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Even before the Cold War ended, however, the thought that we could all
be blasted off this planet faded into the distant background, while the
weaponry itself
[spread](https://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/worldwide) around the
world. Just ask yourself: In these pandemic days, how often do you think
about the fact that we're always just a trigger finger or two away from
nuclear annihilation? And that's especially true now that we know that
even a regional nuclear war between, say, India and Pakistan could
create a[ nuclear-winter
scenario](http://climate.envsci.rutgers.edu/pdf/RobockToonSciAmJan2010.pdf)
in which billions of us might end up starving to death.

And yet, even as this country plans to invest [almost \$2
trillion](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7)
in what's called the "modernization" of its nuclear arsenal, except for
[news
about](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/11/opinion/biden-israel-nuclear-program.html)
a potential future Iranian bomb (but never Israel's actual nukes), such
weapons are seldom on anyone's mind. At least for now, the end of the
world, nuclear-style, is essentially forgotten history.

**That Good-Old Nation-Building Urge**

Right now, of course, the exhausting terror on all our minds is the
updated version of that 1918 pandemic. And another terror has come with
it: the nightmare of today's anti-vaxxing, anti-masking, anti-social
distancing, anti-whatever-crosses-your-mind version of the Republican
Party, so extreme that its mask-less followers [will even
boo](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/trump-booed-alabama-rally-after-telling-supporters-get-vaccinated-n1277404)
former President Donald Trump for suggesting they get vaccinated.

The question is: What do most of the leaders of the Republican Party
actually represent? What terror do they embody? In a sense, the answer's
anything but complicated. In an all-too-literal way, they're murderers.
Given the urge of Republican governors and other legislators, national
and local, to cancel vaccination mandates, stop school-masking, and the
like, they've functionally become [serial
killers](https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2021/12/05/1059828993/data-vaccine-misinformation-trump-counties-covid-death-rate),
the disease equivalents of our endless rounds of [mass
shooters](https://www.gunviolencearchive.org/reports/mass-shooting). But
putting all that aside for a moment, what **else** do they represent?

Let me try to answer that question in an indirect way by starting not
with the terror they now represent but with America's "Global War on
Terror." It was, of course, launched by President George W. Bush and his
top officials in the wake of the 9/11 attacks. Like their neocon
supporters, they were convinced that, with the Soviet Union relegated to
the history books, the world was rightfully theirs to shape however they
wished. The United States was often referred to then as the "sole
superpower" on Planet Earth and they felt it was about time that it
acted accordingly. As Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld [suggested to
his
aides](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/feb/24/freedomofinformation.september11)
in the ruins of the Pentagon on 9/11, "Go massive --- sweep it all up,
things related and not."

He was, of course, referring not simply to al-Qaeda, whose hijackers had
just taken out the World Trade Center and part of the Pentagon, but to
the autocratic ruler of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, who had nothing whatsoever
to do with that terror group. In other words, to those then in power in
Washington, that murderous assault offered the perfect opportunity to
demonstrate how, in a world of midgets, the globe's military and
economic giant should act.

It was a moment, as the phrase then went, for "[nation
building](https://fpif.org/september-11-and-the-debacle-of-nation-building-in-iraq-and-afghanistan/)"
at the point of a sword (or a drone) and President Bush (who had once
been against such efforts) and his top officials came out for them in a
major way. As he [put it
later](https://foreignpolicy.com/2010/11/17/bush-on-nation-building-and-afghanistan/),
the invasion of Afghanistan was "the ultimate nation-building mission,"
as would be the invasion of Iraq a year and a half later.

Of course, we now know all too well that the most powerful country on
the planet, through its armed might and its [uniquely
well-funded](https://tomdispatch.com/the-u-s-military-budget-as-a-mushroom-cloud/)
military, would prove incapable of building anything, no less a new set
of national institutions in far-off lands that would be subservient to
this country. In great power terms, left alone on Planet Earth, the
United States would prove to be the ultimate (un)builder of nations, a
dismantler of the first order globally. Compared to Saddam's Iraq, that
country is today a chaotic mess; while Afghanistan, a poor but
reasonably stable and decent place (even home to the "[hippy
trail](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippie_trail)") before the Soviets
and Americans fought it out there in the 1980s and the U.S. invaded in
2001 is now an almost unimaginable [catastrophe
zone](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2021/12/29/out-of-sight-out-of-mind-afghanistan-vanishes-from-us-news/).

**The Republican Party Unbuilds America**

Perhaps the strangest thing of all, though, was this: somehow, that
powerful, all-American, twenty-first-century urge not to build but
unbuild nations seems to have migrated home from our global war on (or,
[if you
prefer](https://tomdispatch.com/the-war-on-terror-is-a-success----for-terror/),
for) terror. As a result, while anything but an Iraq or Afghanistan, the
United States has nonetheless begun to resemble a nation in the process
of being unbuilt.

I haven't the slightest doubt that you know what I mean. Think of it
this way: thank god the party of Donald Trump was never called the
Democratic Party, since it's now in the process of "lawfully" ([law by
striking
law](https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/voting-laws-roundup-july-2021))
doing its best to dismantle the American democratic system as we've
known it and, as far as that party's concerned, the process has
evidently [only
begun](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/04/us/politics/gop-voting-rights-democrats.html).

Keep in mind that Donald Trump would never have made it to the White
House, nor would that process be so advanced if, under previous
presidents, this country hadn't put its taxpayer dollars to work
dismantling the political and social systems of distant lands in such a
striking fashion. Without the invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq, not to
speak of the ongoing war against ISIS, al-Shabaab, and other
proliferating terror outfits, without the [siphoning
off](https://tomdispatch.com/the-u-s-military-budget-as-a-mushroom-cloud/)
of our money into an ever-expanding military-industrial complex and the
radical growth of
[inequality](https://news.yahoo.com/super-richs-wealth-concentration-surpasses-gilded-age-levels-210802327.html)
in this country, a former
[bankruptee](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/nyregion/donald-trump-atlantic-city.html)
and con man would never have found himself in the Oval Office. It would
have been similarly inconceivable that, more than [five years
later](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/dec/28/6-january-capitol-attack-trump-neofascism-coup-republicans),
"as many as 60% of Republican voters \[would\] continue to believe his
lies" in an essentially religious fashion.

In a sense, in November 2016, Donald Trump was elected to unbuild a
country already beginning to come apart at the seams. In other words, he
shouldn't have been the shock that he was. A presidential version of
autocracy had been growing here before he came near the White House, or
how would his predecessors have been able to fight those wars abroad
without the slightest input from Congress?

And now, of course, this nation is indeed being unbuilt big time by
Republicans with the help of that former president and failed coupster.
They already have a stranglehold on all too many states with the
possibility of taking back Congress in 2022 and the presidency in 2024.

And let's not forget the obvious. Amid a devastating pandemic and
nation-unbuilding on an unnerving scale here at home, there's another
kind of unbuilding going on that couldn't be more dangerous. After all,
we're living on a planet that is itself being unbuilt in striking ways.
In the Christmas season just past, for instance, news about the extremes
of weather globally --- from a [devastating
typhoon](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-59714658) in the
Philippines to staggering
[flooding](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/28/world/americas/brazil-floods-climate-change.html)
in parts of Brazil to the possible
[melting](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2021/12/13/thwaites-glacier-melt-antarctica/)
of the Thwaites Glacier in Antarctica --- has been dramatic, to say the
least.

Similarly, in this country in the last weeks of 2021, the word "record"
was attached to weather events ranging from
[tornados](https://www.wtva.com/news/national/this-was-the-deadliest-24-hours-in-december-for-tornadoes-on-record-heres-what-else/article_87a06b66-d0e2-5ff4-a085-e36b714fb9cc.html)
of an unprecedented sort to winter [heat
waves](https://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-forecasts/dallas-houston-and-okc-set-to-feel-warmest-christmas-on-record/1113719)
to
[blizzards](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/dec/28/western-us-states-freeze-snow-california-nevada-seattle)
and drenching rains to --- in [Alaska of all
places](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/dec/29/alaska-sets-record-high-december-temperature-of-194c)
--- soaring temperatures. And so it goes, as we face an unprecedented
climate emergency with those Republicans and that "moderate" Democrat
Joe Manchin all too ready not just to unbuild a nation but a world,
aided and abetted by the worst criminals in history. And no, in this
case, I'm not thinking of Donald Trump and crew, bad as they may be, but
of the [CEOs of the fossil-fuel
companies](https://tomdispatch.com/best-of-tomdispatch-engelhardt-the-biggest-criminal-enterprise-in-history/).

So, here's what I wonder: Assuming Armageddon doesn't truly arrive,
leaving us all in the dust (or water or fire), if you someday tell your
grandchildren about this world of ours and what we've lived through,
will the Pandemic of 2020-?? and the Climate Crisis of 1900-21?? be
forgotten? Many decades from now, might such nightmares be relegated to
the scribbled notes found in some ancient relative's account of his or
her life?

As 2022 begins, I can only hope so, which, in itself, couldn't be a
sadder summary of our times.

Copyright 2022 Tom Engelhardt

**Follow TomDispatch on **[**Twitter**](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)** and
join us on **[**Facebook**](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)**.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, **[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel **[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**, and
Tom Engelhardt's **[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
as well as Alfred McCoy's **[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** and
John Dower's **[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**.**

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[**TomDispatch.com**](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He is also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [**The
End of Victory
Culture**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth and latest book is [**A Nation Unmade by
War**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**.**

**

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/) where ths article originally appeared -- without the title image.

*Title image from* [https://www.meme-arsenal.com](https://www.meme-arsenal.com)
