# The Donald Also Rises?

![](nazis.jpg){class="a"}

### The Far Right Continues to Build Its International

## By [John Feffer](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/johnfeffer/)

What alt-right guru Steve Bannon failed to create, German taxpayers have
just stepped in to revive: a Nationalist International. Thanks to the
German government, the far right is about to get its own well-heeled
global think tank, complete with the sort of political academy that was
so dear to Bannon's [plan for world
domination](https://tomdispatch.com/john-feffer-a-globalism-of-the-1/).

Germany's gift to the far right is the Desiderius Erasmus Foundation,
the public-policy arm of the country's most prominent extremist party,
the Alternative für Deutschland (AfD). Erasmus, a Dutch humanist of the
Renaissance best known for his ironic essay "In Praise of Folly," would
have been appalled at such a grotesque misappropriation of his name. The
AfD, after all, has built its political base on a series of follies
diametrically opposed to humanism, from its initial anti-immigration
screeds to its current overtures to the [anti-vaccination
crowd](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/germany-election-far-right/2021/09/24/52d7a2a6-1b15-11ec-bea8-308ea134594f_story.html).

[]{#anchor}Strangely enough, the AfD underperformed in the recent German
elections, its parliamentary delegation losing 11 seats. Still, by
capturing a little more than 10% of the vote, the party made it into
parliament a second consecutive time. As a result, it qualifies for what
all other major parties also receive: government support of its
foundation. Unless legal efforts to
[block](https://bylinetimes.com/2021/06/08/millions-from-german-taxpayers-set-to-fund-far-right/)
this largesse succeed, the Erasmus foundation will soon enjoy the
equivalent of tens of millions of taxpayer dollars a year.

Consider that an extraordinary shot in the arm for the global far right,
since the AfD will be funded to establish outposts of hate throughout
the world. The foundation of the left-wing Die Linke party, the more
appropriately labeled Rosa Luxemburg Stiftung, already has offices in
more than 20 countries. The Green Party's foundation, named after Nobel
Prize-winning German novelist Heinrich Böll, is in more than 30
countries. The far right hasn't had this kind of opportunity for global
expansion since fascism's heyday in the 1930s.

The notion that the AfD could engage in anything remotely resembling
"political education" should be laughable. But that's exactly how its
foundation plans to use the coming federal windfall: to [recruit and
train](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/afd-german-elections-far-right-desiderius-erasmus/2021/10/15/474db38e-2d04-11ec-8ef6-3ca8fe943a92_story.html)
a new generation of far-right thinkers and activists. The Erasmus
Stiftung aims to hire [more than 900
people](https://www.tellerreport.com/news/2021-10-13-desiderius-erasmus-foundation--millions-for-the-afd.HJ-cZ7ErY.html)
for its political academy and allied educational institutions. That's
even more ambitious than the academy of intellectual "gladiators" Bannon
[once
dreamed](https://news.artnet.com/art-world/steve-bannons-school-far-right-nationalists-officially-evicted-800-year-old-italian-monastery-leased-2007256)
of creating in a former monastery in the Italian countryside.

The Erasmus
[website](https://erasmus-stiftung.de/taetigkeitsbereiche/auslandsaktivitaeten/)
says nothing about its global ambitions. Based on the AfD's [latest
platform](https://www.euractiv.com/section/politics/news/germanys-far-right-afd-firms-up-election-strategy-with-eu-exit-and-anti-lockdown-campaign/),
however, expect the foundation to gather together Euroskeptics to plot
the evisceration of the European Union; advance the AfD's anti-immigrant
platform with counterparts across Europe like Lega in Italy, Vlaams
Belang in Belgium, Marine Le Pen's National Rally in France, and
[several extremist groups in the
Balkans](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2021/07/germany-alternative-fur-deutschland-dveri-balkans-anti-immigrant-far-right);
and pour money into establishing a "respectable" face for white
nationalism by networking among identitarian groups in North America,
the former Soviet Union, and Australasia.

This thunder on the right certainly sounds ominous. And yet, after the
defeat of Donald Trump in the 2020 elections, the precipitous
[decline](https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/bolsonaros-support-hits-fresh-low-ahead-brazil-2022-vote-poll-shows-2021-09-16/)
in public support for President Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil, and the
ongoing efforts to counter the far right in Eastern Europe, the prospect
of a Nationalist International might seem further away today than, say,
four years ago.

One well-funded German foundation is not likely to change that forecast.
Unfortunately, the Erasmus Foundation is anything but the only storm
cloud on the political horizon.

In reality, the global disillusionment with mainstream politics that
fueled the rise of Trump and his ilk has only grown more intense in
these last months. New authoritarian populists have consolidated power
in places like El Salvador --- where President Nayib Bukele [calls
himself](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/sep/26/naybib-bukele-el-salvador-president-coolest-dictator)
the "world's coolest dictator" --- and are poised for possible takeovers
in countries like Chile and Italy. And who knows? Even Donald Trump
might claw his way back into the White House in 2024.

In other words, just when you thought it might finally be safe to go
back into the international community, the global situation may grow far
worse. With the help of German taxpayers and aided by anger over vaccine
mandates, a malfunctioning world economy, and the enduring corruption of
the powerful, the global right could rebound, securing greater power and
influence in the years to come.

**The Building Wave of Reaction**

At this point, by all the laws of politics, Donald Trump should be
radioactive. He lost his re-election bid in November 2020 and his
subsequent coup attempt failed. He's had a lousy record when it comes to
expanding Republican Party power, having helped that very party forfeit
its House majority in 2018 and its Senate majority in 2020. He continues
to [face multiple
lawsuits](https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2021/03/donald-trump-legally-screwed)
and investigations. He's been barred from Facebook and Twitter.

For Trump, however, politics is a philosopher's stone. He's managed to
transmute his leaden style --- not to mention his countless private
failings and professional bankruptcies --- into political gold. The big
surprise is that so many people continue to fall for such fool's gold.

Because of his fervent, ever-loyal base of support, Trump continues to
control the Republican Party and remains on track to run for president
in 2024, with no credible Republican competition in sight. Even his
overall popularity, which never made it above
[50%](https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/trump-approval-ratings/) when
he was president, has recently improved marginally from a February low
of 38.8% percent to an [almost sunny
43.4%](https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/polls/favorability/donald-trump/).

Led by this urban elitist from New York, the Republican Party has all
but given up on cities and reliably blue regions of the country. Still,
it now controls all the levers of power [in 23
states](https://ballotpedia.org/State_government_trifectas), while the
Democrats do so in only 15. With a mixture of gerrymandering, voter
suppression, federal stonewalling, and a master narrative about
fraudulent elections, the Republicans aim to win back control of
Congress in 2022 --- something the odds [increasingly
favor](https://fortune.com/2021/11/03/republicans-house-senate-midterms-2022-predictit-betting-odds/)
--- on their way to reclaiming the White House in 2024. At the moment,
Donald Trump is the [bookies'
choice](https://local12.com/news/nation-world/trump-now-has-the-best-betting-odds-of-winning-2024-presidential-election-site-says-donald-president-america-joe-biden-kamala-harris)
to win the next presidential election, largely on the strength of not
being Joe Biden (just as he won in 2016 by not being Hillary Clinton).

Since he can't run for king of the world, Trump cares little about
building international alliances, but the growing potential for him to
return to power in 2024 has inspired right-leaning populists globally to
believe that they, too, can lead their countries without the requisite
skill, experience, or psychological stability. Indeed, from President
Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines to President Daniel Ortega of
Nicaragua, being vulgar and vicious has already served a variety of them
all too well.

Even more troubling is the new generation of Trump-style politicians
coming to the fore globally. In Chile, for instance, the
once-traditional conservative José Antonio Kast has remade himself as a
far-right populist and in November [won the first
round](https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/chiles-bosolonaro-hard-right-kast-rises-targeting-crime-violence-2021-11-22/)
of that country's presidential elections. Across the Pacific in the
Philippines, an all-too-literal political marriage of authoritarianism
and populism is taking place as Bongbong Marcos, the son of the
notorious former dictator Ferdinand Marcos, has selected Sara, the
daughter of Rodrigo Duterte, to be his running mate in next year's
presidential election. Polling already puts them [way
ahead](https://www.ucanews.com/news/polls-show-marcos-jr-leading-philippine-presidential-race/94901)
of the competition. In France, where Marine Le Pen has had a lock on the
extremist vote for a decade, journalist Éric Zemmour is challenging her
[from the
right](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/oct/08/same-old-french-far-right-the-meteoric-rise-of-eric-zemmour)
with his predictions of a coming civil war and Muslim takeover.

Meanwhile, Trump's minions in America are strengthening their
international connections to create a global field of dreams. For many
of them, Hungary remains the home plate of that very field of dreams.
Right-wingers have been flocking to Budapest to learn how that country's
prime minister, Viktor Orbán, transformed the most liberal corner of
Eastern Europe into the region's most reactionary country. (Admittedly,
he now faces stiff competition from the Law and Justice Party in Poland
and Janez Janša's Slovenian Democratic Party, among other right-wing
forces in Eastern Europe.)

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0745341896/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Typically enough, former vice president Mike Pence visited Budapest in
September to
[praise](https://www.newsweek.com/mike-pence-praises-hungarian-leaders-conservative-policies-hopes-scotus-bans-abortion-1631986)
Orbán's "family-centric" anti-abortion version of social policy. This
summer, Tucker Carlson
[broadcast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VXujFNBV63I) a full week of
his Fox News program from that same city. In the process, he devoted an
entire show to Orbán's virulently anti-immigrant initiatives, headlining
it: "Why can't we have this in America?" In fact, this country's most
reactionary political types are so in love with Hungary that they're
scheduling the annual Conservative Policy Action Conference for Budapest
next spring, which will only [cement such a transatlantic
link](https://www.hungarianconservative.com/articles/current/budapest-to-host-the-largest-american-conservative-conference/).

Remember, in 2002, Orbán was kicked out of the prime minister's office
after one term in office, only to return to power in 2010. He's been
ruling ever since. The Trumpistas dream of pulling off just such a
political comeback in America.

Elsewhere in Europe, the Spanish far-right party Vox has established its
own Disenso Foundation to knit together a reactionary "Iberosphere" that
includes [the Mexican
right](https://www.belltower.news/far-right-iberosphere-international-network-of-spains-vox-party-122475/),
[extremists in
Colombia](https://remonews.com/colombiaeng/the-spanish-far-right-on-the-political-conquest-of-colombia/),
the [Bolsonaro family in
Brazil](https://www.voxespana.es/actualidad/la-fundacion-disenso-lanza-un-documental-donde-alerta-de-la-expansion-del-foro-de-sao-paulo-20211029),
and even Texas senator [Ted
Cruz](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/oct/15/us-republicans-european-far-right).
 But the Western Europe state most likely to follow Hungary's lead is
Italy. Right now, Prime Minister Mario Draghi, the former head of the
European Central Bank, presides over a technocratic administration in
Rome. Italian politics, however, is heading straight for neo-fascism.
The party that's only recently surged to the [top of the
polls](https://www.politico.eu/europe-poll-of-polls/italy/), Brothers of
Italy, has its roots in a group started in the wake of World War II by
diehard supporters of Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini. It promotes an
anti-vaxx "Italy first"
[agenda](https://www.haaretz.com/opinion/.premium-how-anti-vaxxers-could-propel-italy-s-far-right-into-power-1.10044352)
and, if elections were held today, [would likely
create](https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/countering-radical-right/next-election-italians-have-two-options-right-or-further-right/)
a ruling coalition with the alt-right Lega Party and right-wing populist
Silvio Berlusconi's Forward Italy. 

Meanwhile, several right-wing nationalists and populists are padding
their CVs for a future role as the head of any new Nationalist
International. Russian President Vladimir Putin may have the strongest
claim to the title, given his longstanding
[support](https://www.jstor.org/stable/48600543?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents)
for right-wing and Euroskeptical parties, as well as the way he's
positioned Russia as the preeminent [anti-liberal
power](https://www.ft.com/content/670039ec-98f3-11e9-9573-ee5cbb98ed36)
around. 

Don't rule out Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, though. He's
[mended
fences](https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/joining-the-wolves-erdogan-s-pact-with-the-ultra-nationalists-a-52bf30cd-4431-4af7-b9af-3aa83c141b0e)
with the far right in his own country, while trying to establish Turkey
as a regional hegemon. Increasingly disillusioned with his NATO peers,
he's purchased weapons from Russia and even [hinted
at](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/20/world/middleeast/erdogan-turkey-nuclear-weapons-trump.html)
pushing Turkey into the nuclear club. And don't forget Indian Prime
Minister Narendra Modi either. Working overtime to contain China, the
Hindu nationalist has also been assiduously cultivating strong relations
with the right-wing in both the U.S. and
[Israel](https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2021/9/9/indias-deepening-love-affair-with-israel).

Creating an actual Axis of Illiberalism from such disparate countries
would not be easy given geopolitical rivalries, ideological differences,
and personal ambitions. Still, the failures of current global
institutions --- and the liberal internationalism that animates them ---
provide a powerful glue with the potential to hold together genuinely
disparate elements in an emerging right, adding up to a new version of
global fascism.

When the future members of a Nationalist International argue that the
status quo --- a raging pandemic, runaway climate change, persistent
economic inequality, staggering numbers of displaced people on the move
--- is broken and they have just the plan to fix it, plenty of
non-extremists are likely to find the message all too compelling. Short
on hope and desperate for change, the disaffected and disenfranchised
have proven willing to offer the noisy nationalists and reactionary
populists a shot at power (which, given their unscrupulous tactics, may
be all they need).

**Saving the World (from Liberals)**

One of the most persistent symbols of international politics has
certainly been the wall. Think of the Great Wall of China, designed to
protect successive dynasties from the predations of nomadic outsiders.
Many metropolitan areas around the world have retained some portion of
the historic walls that once established them as city-states. The Berlin
Wall was the most visible symbol of the Cold War, while Trump's border
wall was the only infrastructure program of his presidency (even if it
was [never truly
built](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-46748492)).

The far right is now --- thank you, Donald Trump! --- obsessed with
walls, drawing on not only history but a deep reservoir of fear of the
outsider. Like "austerity" for neoliberals, "walls" have proven the far
right's one-size-fits-all answer to almost every question. Immigrants?
Wall them out. [Climate
change](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/nov/21/climate-denial-far-right-immigration)?
Build walls now to prevent future waves of desperate global-warming
refugees. Economic decline? Hey, install those tariff walls. Angry
neighbors? Walls of weaponry and anti-missile defenses are the obvious
answer.

The far right considers not [rising sea
levels](https://www.cnn.com/2021/10/12/world/3-degrees-sea-level-rise-climate-central/index.html)
but globalization --- trade flows, the movement of people, expanding
international governance --- as the tide that needs containing. Far
right populists are busy constructing dikes of all sorts to keep out
such unwanted global flows and preserve national control in an
increasingly chaotic world.

Moving down the great chain of governance, it's no surprise that the far
right also wants to culturally wall off communities to uphold what it
calls "family values" against contrary civic values, different religious
practices, and alternate conceptions of sexuality and gender. It even
wants to wall off individuals to ["protect" them
against](https://fpif.org/if-you-think-vaccine-mandate-pushback-is-bad/)
intrusive government practices like vaccine mandates. To secure such
walls, literal or metaphoric, what's needed above all are a bloated
military at the national level, paramilitaries at the community level,
and a semi-automatic in the hands of every red-blooded right-wing
individual.

Such walls are a hedge against uncertainty, though ironically the far
right's truest contribution to modern political ideology is not
certainty, but a radical skepticism. Sure, that ancient right-wing
American crew, the John Birch Society, did traffic in conspiracy
theories involving Communists and fluoridated water. But that was
nothing compared to the way the modern political right has weaponized
conspiracy theories to acquire permanent power. With claims of stolen
elections, Donald Trump, Benjamin Netanyahu, and others [have even cast
doubt](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/06/trump-fraud-stop-steal-copycats/619226/)
on the very capacity of democracy to represent voters, emphasizing that
only populist extremists can represent the "authentic" wishes of the
electorate.

On the other hand, elections that far-right candidates win, like the
recent gubernatorial race in Virginia, are automatically [defined as
free and
fair](https://www.businessinsider.com/trump-republicans-silent-voter-fraud-claims-youngkin-virginia-election-2021-11).
Radical skepticism about the electoral system, after all, is only a
convenient ladder that, once in power, the far right is all too ready to
kick away.

The final conspiracy theory to fall will undoubtedly be the
[nefariousness of the
"globalists"](https://tomdispatch.com/john-feffer-a-globalism-of-the-1/)
who have teamed up to sully the "[precious bodily
fluids](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1KvgtEnABY)" of pure Americans
(or Brazilians or Hungarians). As long as liberal internationalists run
global institutions like the World Bank and the World Health
Organization, "globalists" will be useful bogeys for the nationalists to
rally their followers. However, if the Trumps of this world capture
enough countries and successfully infiltrate global institutions, then
there will be no more talk of evil globalists.

In that worst-case scenario, even a Nationalist International will no
longer be necessary as we discover in Hemingway fashion that, for Trump
and his kind, the sun also rises. For all practical purposes, right-wing
populists will have taken over the world. Given their blithe disregard
for pandemics and climate change, such a victory would, of course, be
pyrrhic.

Their win, humanity's loss.

Copyright 2021 John Feffer

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

#### [John Feffer](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/johnfeffer/)

**John Feffer**,
a [*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/climate-change-transition-in-the-age-of-the-billionaire/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/climate-change-transition-in-the-age-of-the-billionaire/),
is the author of the dystopian novel
[*Splinterlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467244/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and* *the
director of Foreign Policy In Focus at the Institute for Policy
Studies.* [*Frostlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
a Dispatch Books original, is volume two of his *Splinterlands* series
and the final novel in the trilogy,
[*Songlands*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
has just been published. He has also written [*The Pandemic
Pivot*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1644210932/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
More information about the new IPS project on a Global Just Transition
can be [found here.](https://fpif.org/global-just-transition/)

Thanks to \<a href="htttps://tomdispatch.com">TomDispatch.com\</a> where
this article originally appeared.
