# Letters to the Editor

RE: [Breathe](https://southerncrossreview.org/141/hemsley-breathe.html) by Becky Hemsley

just wonderful.

Roger A. Chase

Lovely! (beathe)\
besos,

JoAnn Schwartz

Thank you. This is wonderful.

Ondria J. Wasern

WONDRFUL POEM FRANK!

Lynn Strongin

My goodness!, could be a poem about me! I love it!

Kendal Weaver

RE: [The Donald Also Rises? - The Far Right Continues to Build Its International](southerncrossreview.org/141/feffer-the-donald.html) by John Feffer

Dear Mr. Feffer,

There is much brilliance in your article in the Southern Cross Review
about internationalist organizing by far-right movements around the
world. I was very pleased with your article. (I am not an
anthroposophist and heard about the article from a family member.)

However, my enjoyment in reading it was marred by finding that you group
Daniel Ortega, recently re-elected as President of Nicaragua by 76% of
the vote over several rival candidates---with Duterte, characterizing
them both as \"vulgar and vicious\"!

The reporters who told you unpleasant \"facts\" about Nicaragua\'s
recent and current leadership have swallowed whole the propaganda spewed
by a small number of right wing oligarches and their minions. They have
never gone to Nicaragua and interviewed all sides; they have not checked
their sources to see which ones are U.S.-funded and which are not.

See the 55-page online report by the Nicaragua Network, \"Dismissing the
Truth: Why Amnesty International is Wrong About Nicaragua\"---free
download at

[Dismissing the Truth](https://secureservercdn.net/198.71.233.230/jwp.e46.myftpupload.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Dismissing-the-Truth-with-links.pdf)

A subsequent report, \"The Revolution Won\'t Be Stopped,\" is available
at

[The Revolution Won't Be Stopped: Nicaragua Advances Despite US
Unconventional Warfare - Alliance for Global
Justice](https://afgj.org/download/the-revolution-wont-be-stopped-nicaragua-advances-despite-us-unconventional-warfare)Â 

Sadly, U.S. policy towards Nicaragua has been implacably negative, from
the overthrow of Somoza and the contra war against Nicaragua, to
today\'s constant propaganda infecting even the left in the U.S. It\'s
unfathomable that such a small, poor country could ever constitute a
danger to us! Yet U.S. official hostility continues apace. Because
Nicaraguans prevented a U.S.-sponsored coup in 2018, and got rid of
Somoza, an actual dictator, in 1979, and because they stated they are
\"socialist\"---actually more like European social democrats, operating
in the context of a market---our country declares they are an enemy.

I hope you will look into this foolishness, which hurts Nicaraguans
through sanctions and continued enmity.

I was able to win some church sponsorship to visit Nicaragua with Oxfam
in 1985 to explore how the \'79 Revolution had improved nutrition and
farmworkers\' rights in Nicaragua. Since that two-week tour, I\'ve kept
up with Nicaragua\'s news and development from here. My son Tom Louie
spent a couple of months in Nicaragua not long after my trip. His
fluency in Spanish helped him to explore the country more freely than I
had.

Sincerely,

Mary

Mary Dugan\
New York\
Tel. 646-489-3517
