Dear Mary Dugan:

Thank you for your recent letter to the Southern Cross Review about my
article about Donald Trump, which was forwarded to me by the editor.

I am happy to hear about your work in the 1980s on behalf of Nicaragua.
I, too, was thrilled when the Sandinistas ousted Somoza and I was very
supportive of the Sandinista social programs in the 1980s.

And that is precisely why I feel it is so important to call out Daniel
Ortega right now and voice my support for all the Sandinistas that he
has thrown in jail or forced into exile. These include his former Vice
President Sergio Ramirez who fled to Spain after the government tried to
arrest him. Those who were not so lucky and are now in prison include
former Sandinistas Hugo Torres, who freed Ortega from prison back in
1974, and Dora Tellez, who as health minister set up the health programs
that you and I so admired in the 1980s.

Ortega broke with his former colleagues to make alliances with
right-wing politicians, powerful business interests, and the Catholic
Church. At this point, he governs from the far right, not the left. I
would recommend that you read [this article
](https://nacla.org/ortega-elections-sandinistas-fsln)in NACLA, which
has long been a reliable left-wing publication covering developments in
Latin America.

If you care about Nicaragua and preserving the real legacy of the
Sandinistas, I would urge you to take a fresh look at what Daniel Ortega
is doing in Nicaragua.

\"Vulgar and vicious\" is actually an understatement when looking at how
he has unraveled the Sandinista programs in order to serve his own
thirst for power.

all the best,

John

\--

John Feffer

Director, Foreign Policy In Focus

Institute for Policy Studies

[www.fpif.org](http://www.fpif.org/)

[www.johnfeffer.com](https://usmail.soros.org/owa/redir.aspx?C=5e39ea53ff48415e93e52c1603b8ce5f&URL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.johnfeffer.com)

Latest book: [Right Across the
World](https://www.amazon.com/Right-Across-World-Networking-Far-Right/dp/0745341896)

Latest novel:
[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/Songlands-Dispatch-John-Feffer/dp/1642594644/ref=sr_1_2?dchild=1&qid=1620951292&refinements=p_27%3AJohn+Feffer&s=books&sr=1-2&text=John+Feffer)
