# Christmas at a Time of Grievous Destiny

### Anthroposophy and Gnosis

![](stanle-1.jpg){class="alarge"}

## A lecture by Rudolf Steiner


for members of the Anthroposophical Society \
Basel, December 21, 1916 GA 173

Translation: D.S. Osmond (edited here)

THE yearly celebration of the physical birth of the Being Who
entered earth-evolution in order to give that evolution its meaning,
has for many people become a matter of habit. But if, in agreement
with the task of our spiritual-scientific movement, we are not
content with celebrating a festival of mere custom --- as is so
general nowadays --- it will be opportune at this grave time to turn
our minds to many things that are connected with the physical birth
of the Christ Jesus.

We have often pictured how in the Christ Jesus, so far as human
comprehension goes, two beings merge as it were into one: the Christ
Being and the human Jesus Being. In the evolution of Christianity
there has been much conflict, much conflict of dogma, about the
meaning of the union of Christ with Jesus, in the being whose
physical birth is celebrated at the Christmas Festival. We
ourselves, of course, recognise in the Christ a cosmic,
super-earthly being, who descended from spiritual worlds in order,
through His birth in a physical man, to impart meaning to
earth-evolution. And in Jesus we recognise the one who, as man, was
predestined after thirty years of preparation, to unite the Christ
being with himself, to receive the Christ being into himself.

Not only has there been much strife, much conflict of dogma, about
the nature of the union of Christ with Jesus, but the relationship
of Christ to Jesus contains a hint of significant secrets of the
earthly evolution of mankind. If, in the endeavour to understand
something of the union of Christ with Jesus, we follow events up to
the present day and reflect upon what has still to take place in the
evolution of humanity before this relationship can be rightly
understood, then we touch upon one of the deepest secrets of human
knowledge and human life.

At the time when Christ was about to enter the evolution of humanity
it was possible, through faculties that were a heritage from the
days of the old clairvoyant wisdom, to form certain conceptions of
the sublimity of the Christ Being. And at that time there existed a
wisdom of which people often speak nowadays in a way that is almost
blasphemous, but of which they are scarcely able to form any true
idea. There existed something which up to this day has been
completely exterminated from human evolution, rooted out by certain
currents running counter to the deeper Christian revelation: this
was Gnosis, a wisdom into which had flowed much of the ancient
knowledge revealed to men in atavistic clairvoyance. Every trace of
Gnosis, whether in script or oral tradition, was exterminated root
and branch by the dogmatic Christianity of the West --- after this
Gnosis had striven to find an answer to the question: Who is the
Christ?

There can be no question today of reverting to Gnosis --- for the
Gnosis belongs to an age that is past and over. True, its
extermination was caused by malice, ignorance, enmity towards
knowledge and wisdom \... but for all that it happened out of an
underlying necessity. When anthroposophical spiritual science is
accused of wanting to revive the ancient Gnosis, that is only one of
the many expressions of ill-will directed towards it today. The
accusation is, of course, made by people whose ignorance of the
Gnosis is on a par with their ignorance of Anthroposophy. There is
no question of reviving the Gnosis, but of recognising it as
something great and mighty, something that endeavoured, in the time
now lying nineteen hundred years behind us, to give an answer to the
question: Who is the Christ?

Before the inner eye of the Gnostic lay a glorious vista of
spiritual worlds, with the Hierarchies ranged in their order, one
above the other. How the Christ had descended through the worlds of
the spiritual Hierarchies to enter into the sheaths of a mortal man
--- all this stood before the soul of the Gnostic. And he tried to
envisage how the Christ had come from heights of spirit, how He had
been conceived on earth. The best way to get some idea of the
knowledge then existing is to reflect that everything produced by
the world after the extermination of Gnosis was paltry in comparison
with the grandeur of the Gnostic idea of the Christ. The
Mystery-wisdom behind the Gospels is infinitely great --- greater by
far than anything which later theology has been able to discover
from them. To realise how paltry and insignificant compared with the
Gnosis is the current conception of the Christ Being, we have but to
steep ourselves in the ancient Gnostic idea of Him. Picturing this,
one is filled with humility by the grandeur of the conception of the
Christ Being entering into a human body from cosmic heights, from
far distant cosmic worlds.

This majestic, sublime concept of Christ has fallen into the
background, but all the dogmatic definitions handed down to us as
Arian or Athanasian principles of faith are meagre in comparison
with the Gnostic conception, in which vision of the Christ Being was
combined with wisdom relating to the universe. ([^1])
Only the merest fragments of this great Gnostic conception of Christ
have survived.

This, then, is one aspect of the relationship of Christ to Jesus:
that Christ came into the world at a time when the wisdom capable of
understanding Him, yearning to understand Him, had already been
rooted out. People who speak of the ancient Gnosis as oriental
phantasy that had to be exterminated for the good of Western
humanity, have always believed themselves to be good Christians, but
the real cause was that the mind of the age lacked the strength to
unite earthly with heavenly concepts. One must have a feeling for
the tragic if human evolution is to be understood.

How long after the Mystery of Golgotha was the Temple at Jerusalem,
the sanctuary of peace, destroyed? The Temple of Solomon was within
the precincts of the city of Jerusalem. What the Gnosis contained in
the form of *wisdom*, Solomon\'s Temple contained in the form
of *symbolism*. Cosmic secrets were presented in symbols and
pictures. And it was intended that those who entered the Temple,
where the pictures all around them were reflected in their souls,
should receive something through which alone they became
truly *human*. The purpose of the Temple of Solomon was to inculcate
the meaning of worlds into the souls of those who were permitted to
enter it. What the Temple revealed was something that the earth as
such did not reveal, namely, all the cosmic secrets that ray into
the earth from the cosmic expanse.

If one of the old initiates possessing real knowledge of the Temple
of Solomon had been asked: Why was the Temple of Solomon built? ---
the answer would have been somewhat as follows: 'In order that here
on the earth there shall be a beacon light for those Powers who
accompany the souls seeking their way into earthly bodies.' Let us
try to grasp what this means, realising that these old initiates of
the Temple of Solomon knew that when men were being accompanied into
earthly bodies in conformity with all the signs of the stars, then
particular souls must be guided to bodies in which the great symbols
of Solomon\'s Temple could be mirrored.

This, in the nature of things, might give rise to arrogance. If the
knowledge was not received with humility, with the humility of
the *Essenes*, it led men into *Pharisaism*! But at all events, this
was the situation: The eye of earth looked up to the heavens,
beholding the stars; the spiritual eyes of those who were guiding
souls from cosmic worlds to the earth gazed downwards and beheld the
Temple of Solomon with its symbols. The Temple was like a star whose
light enabled them to guide the souls into bodies which would be
capable of understanding its meaning. It was the central star of the
earth, shining out with special brightness into the spiritual
heights.

When the Christ Jesus had come to the earth, when the Mystery of
Golgotha had taken place, the great secret that was intended to be
mirrored in every single human soul was this: \"My kingdom is not of
this world!\" It was then that the external, physical Temple of
Solomon lost its significance and its destiny was tragically
fulfilled. Moreover at that time there was no living person who
would have been capable of apprehending the full compass of the
Christ Being from the reflections of the symbols in Solomon\'s
Temple. But the Christ Himself had now entered earth-evolution, had
become part of it. That is the all-important fact. The Gnostics were
the last survivors of the bearers of that ancient, atavistic
earth-wisdom which was comprehensive and powerful enough to make
some understanding of the Christ possible.

That, then, is one aspect of the relation of Christ to Jesus. In
those days the Christ Being could have been understood through
Gnosis. But according to the world-plan it was not to be ---
although the Gnosis teemed with wisdom concerning the Christ. And it
may truly be said that the path now taken by Christianity through
the countries of the South, through Greece, Italy, Spain and so on,
led more and more to the obliteration of insight into the essential
nature of Christ. And Rome, sinking into decline, was destined to
bring about the final extinction of understanding.

In regard to this relation of the Christ to Jesus it is strange that
on the one hand we find lighting up in the Gnosis a sublime
conception of the *Christ *which died away as Christianity passed
through the Roman system, while on the other hand, when Christianity
encountered the peoples from the North, the concept of *Jesus* came
to the fore. In the South, the concept of Christ flickered out. The
form in which the concept of Jesus emerged was by no means very
sublime, but it gripped men\'s hearts and feelings in such a way
that something wonderfully absorbing stirred in their souls at the
thought of how the Child who receives the Christ is born on the Holy
Night. Just as in the South the concept of Christ was inadequate, so
in the North was man\'s feeling for Jesus. But for all that it was a
feeling that stirred the very depths of the human heart. Yet in
itself it is not quite comprehensible. For if we contrast the
immeasurable significance of Christ Jesus for the evolution of
humanity with all the sentimental trivialities about the 'dear
little Jesus' contained in many poems and hymns commonly used to
move the human heart --- for in their egoism people believe that
these trivialities kindle emotions capable of storming the heavens
--- then we have a direct impression that something is striving to
make its home but is not fully able to do so, that one element is
mingling with another in such a way that the deeper meaning, the far
deeper significance, remains in the subconscious.

What actually is it that remains in the subconscious while the
Jesus-thought, the Jesus-feeling, the Jesus-experience, is coming to
the surface? The process takes a strange and remarkable course. The
understanding for Christ sank into the subconscious and there, in
the subconscious, the understanding for Jesus began to glow. In the
subconscious --- not in consciousness, which was dim --- the
consciousness of Christ that was flickering out and the
consciousness of Jesus that was beginning to stir were destined to
meet and counter-balance each other. Why was it, then, that the
peoples who came down from Scandinavia, from the North of
present-day Russia, received Christianity without the Christ-idea
which, to begin with, was wholly foreign to them? Why was it that
they received Christianity with the Jesus-idea? Why was Christmas
the festival which above all others spoke to the human heart,
awakened in the human heart feelings of holy bliss? Why was it? What
was present in this Europe which in truth received from the South a
completely distorted Christianity? What was it that kindled in
men\'s hearts the idea which then, in the Christmas Festival,
created such a deep, deep fount of experience?

People had been prepared --- but had largely forgotten by what they
had been prepared. They had been prepared by the old Northern
Mysteries. But they had forgotten the import and meaning of these
ancient Mysteries. And we have to go very far back into the past to
discover from the source and content of the Northern Mysteries the
deep secret of the penetration of the Jesus-feeling into the
soul-life of the European peoples.

The principles underlying the Northern Mysteries were quite
different from those underlying the Mysteries of Asia Minor and of
the South. The experiences underlying the Northern Mysteries were
more intimately and directly connected with the existence of the
stars, with nature, with earthly fertility, than with the wisdom
represented in symbols within a Temple. The Mystery-truths are not
the childish trifles presented by certain mystic sects today; the
Mystery-truths are great and potent impulses in the evolution of
mankind. Present-day Anthroposophy can no more revert to the Gnosis
than mankind can revert to what the ancient Mysteries of the North,
for example, signified for human evolution. And to believe that such
Mystery-truths are now being revealed because of some kind of
hankering to go back to what was once alive in them, would be a
foolish misunderstanding. It is for the sake of deepening
self-recollection, self-knowledge, that mankind today must be made
aware of the content of such Mysteries. For what linked the Northern
Mysteries with the whole evolution of the universe, arose from the
earth, just as the Gnostic wisdom, inspired from the cosmos, was
connected with happenings in the far distances of the universe. How
the *secret of man*, linked as it is with all the secrets of the
cosmos, comes into operation when a human being enters physical
existence on the earth --- it was this that, with greater depth than
anywhere else at a certain period of earth-evolution, lay at the
root of these ancient Northern Mysteries.

But we have to go very far back --- to about three thousand years
before Christ, perhaps even earlier --- to understand what was alive
in the hearts of those in whom, later on, the feeling for Jesus
arose. Somewhere in the region of the peninsula of Jutland, in
present-day Denmark, was the centre from which, in those ancient
times, important impulses went out from the Mysteries. And --- let
the modern intellect judge of this as it will --- these impulses
were connected with the fact that in the third millennium before
Christ, in certain Northern tribes, he alone was regarded as a
worthy citizen of the earth who was born in certain weeks of the
winter season. The reason for this was that from those places of the
Mysteries on the peninsula of Jutland, among the tribes which at
that time called themselves the Ingaevones, or were so called by the
Romans --- by Tacitus ([^2])
--- the Temple Priest gave the sign for sexual union to take place
at a definite time during the first quarter of the year. Any sexual
union outside the period ordained by this Mystery-centre was taboo;
and in this tribe of the Ingaevones a man who was not born in the
period of the darkest nights, at the time of greatest cold, towards
our New Year, was regarded as an inferior being. For the impulse
went out from that Mystery-centre at the time of the first full moon
after the vernal equinox. Only then, among those who might believe
themselves united with the spiritual world as became the dignity of
man, was sexual union permissible. The characteristic virility ---
even in its aftermath --- marvelled at by Tacitus, writing a century
after the Mystery of Golgotha, was due to the fact that the forces
which enter into such sexual union were preserved through the whole
of the rest of the year.

And so those who belonged to the tribe of the Ingaevones (and in a
lesser degree this was also true of the other Germanic tribes)
experienced the process of conception with particular intensity at
the time of the first full moon after the vernal equinox. They
experienced it, not in wide-awake consciousness, but as it were
heralded in dream. Yet they were aware of its significance in regard
to the connection between the secret of man and the secrets of the
heavens. A spiritual being appeared to the woman who was to conceive
and in a kind of vision announced to her the human being who,
through her, was to come to the earth. There was no clear
consciousness, but only semi-consciousness, in the sphere
experienced by souls when the entry of a human being into the
physical world is taking place; subconsciously people knew that they
were under the direction of the Gods, who then received the name of
the *Wanen*, connected with *wähnen*, that is to say with what takes
its course, not in clear, intellectual, waking consciousness, but in
cognitive dream-consciousness.

What was once in existence and fitting for its own epoch, is often
preserved in later times in symbols. Thus the fact that in those
ancient times the holy mystery of the generation of a human being
was wrapped in subconsciousness, and led to all births being
concentrated in a particular period of the winter season, so that it
was regarded as sinful for a person to be born at another time ---
this was preserved in fragments which passed over to a later
consciousness as the Hertha or Erda or Nertus Saga. No erudition, as
scholars themselves openly admit, has hitherto been able to
interpret these fragments, for actually all that is known externally
of the Nertus Saga, with the exception of a few brief notes, comes
from Tacitus, who writes as follows about the Nertus or Hertha cult:

> > \"The Reudigni, Aviones, Anglii, Varini, Eudoses, Saurini and
Nuitones --- Germanic peoples living amidst rivers and woods\" (that
is, roughly the several tribes who belong to the Ingaevones) \"
specially revere *Nertus*, that is, *Mother Earth*, and they believe
that she intervenes in human affairs, makes journeys to the
peoples.\" (Germania 40).

In the ancient cult of the Wanen it became known in
dream-consciousness to every woman who was to give a citizen to the
earth that the Goddess worshipped later on as Nertus would appear to
her. The Divinity was, however, represented not exactly as female,
but as male-female. It was not until later, through a corruption,
that Nertus became an entirely feminine principle. Just as the
Archangel Gabriel drew near to Mary, Nertus on her chariot drew near
to the woman who was about to give a person to the earth. The woman
concerned saw this in the spirit. Later, when the Mystery-impulse in
this form had long since died out, echoes of the happening were
celebrated in symbolic rites which Tacitus was still able to witness
and of which he says the following: ---

> > \"On an island of the ocean is a sacred grove and in it there is a
consecrated chariot covered with a veil. Only the priest may
approach it.\" --- This priest was taken to represent the 'Initiate'
of the Hertha-Mystery --- \"He knows when the Goddess appears in the
sacred chariot. He becomes aware of the presence of the Goddess in
her holy place, and in deep reverence accompanies her chariot drawn
by cows. Then there are days of joy and feasting in all the places
which the Goddess honours with a visit. Then there are joyous days
and wedding feasts. At those times no war is waged, no weapons are
handled, the sword is sheathed. Only peace and quiet are at those
times known or desired, until the Goddess, tired of her sojourn
among mortals, is led back into her shrine by the same priest.\"

\"Then there are joyous days and wedding feasts.\" In such ancient
records the descriptions are accurate and exact, only people do not
understand them. \"Then there are joyous days and wedding feasts. At
those times no war is waged, no weapons are handled, the sword is
sheathed.\" And so it was in very truth at the time which is now our
Easter, when human beings believed in their inmost soul that the
time of earthly fruitfulness had come for them too; it was then that
the souls who were born at the time that is now our Christmas, were
conceived. Easter was the time of conception. The experience was
regarded as a holy, cosmic mystery, and it was this that was
symbolised later on by the Nertus cult. The whole experience was
veiled in the subconscious region of the soul, might not rise up
into consciousness. This is hinted at in the description of the cult
given by Tacitus: \"Only peace and quiet are at those times known or
desired --- until the Goddess, tired of her sojourn among mortals,
is led back into her shrine by the same priest. Then the chariot and
the veil and even the Goddess herself are bathed in a hidden lake.
Slaves perform the cult, slaves who are at once swallowed up as
forfeit by the lake, so that all knowledge of these things sinks
into the night of unconsciousness. A secret horror and a sacred
darkness hold sway over a being who is able to behold only the
sacrifice of death.\"

Everything that comes into the world calls forth a Luciferic and an
Ahrimanic counterpart. The event which --- as experienced by the
Ingaevones --- was part of the regular, ordained evolution of
mankind was connected with the time of the first full moon after the
vernal equinox. But owing to the precession of the equinox, what had
remained from olden days as a dream-experience was transferred to a
later date and therefore became Ahrimanic. When the experience that
had arisen in ancient times in the true Hertha cult was advanced
about four weeks, it became Ahrimanic. This meant that the union of
the woman with the spiritual world was sought in an irregular way
--- at the wrong time. Here lies the explanation of the institution
of the *Walpurgis Night* --- between the 30th April and the 1st May.
It is nothing but an Ahrimanic transposition of time. Luciferic
transposition of time goes backward; Ahrimanic transposition of time
runs in the opposite direction, being connected with the precession
of the equinox. Thus the Ahrimanic, Mephistophelean form of the
Hertha cult, the perversion into the diabolic, later became the
Walpurgis Night; it is connected with the most ancient Mysteries of
which only faint echoes remained.

Much of the content of the ancient Northern Mysteries lived on ---
if the matter is rightly understood --- in the Scandinavian
Mysteries. There, instead of Nertus, we find Friggo, a god who,
according to the symbolism associated with him --- but this can
become intelligible only through spiritual science --- turns into
the very betrayer of what lies at the root of this Mystery.

One more thing must be mentioned in regard to these
Mystery-practices. You can see that if the human seed was ripening
from the time of the vernal full moon to winter time, *one* such
human being would be the *first* to be born in the 'Holy Night.'
Among the Ingaevones the first to be born in the Holy Night --- the
Holy Night of every third year in the most ancient times --- was
chosen as their leader when he reached the age of thirty, and he
remained leader for three years, for three years only. What happened
to him then I may perhaps be able to tell you on another occasion.

Careful investigation reveals that not only are Frigg, Frei, Freiga,
merely additional designations for Nertus, as is the Scandinavian
'Nört,' but the name 'Ing' itself, whence Ingaevones, is another
name for Nertus. Those who were connected with the Mystery called
themselves \"Men belonging to the God or the Goddess Ing\" ---
Ingaevones. Only fragments of what really lived in this Mystery
survived in the external world. One such fragment consists of the
words of Tacitus already quoted. Another fragment is the well-known
Anglo-Saxon rune of a few lines only. These famous lines are known
to every philologist of the Germanic languages, but no one
understands their meaning. They are approximately as follows:

> > \"Ing was first seen among the East Danes. Later he went towards the
East. He walked over the waves, followed by his chariot.\"

In this Anglo-Saxon rune there is an echo of what lay behind the old
Mystery-customs of the Easter conception with a view to the
Christmas birth. What happened then in the spiritual world was known
best on the Danish peninsula. Hence the rune correctly says: \"Ing
was first seen among the East Danes.\"

Then came the time when this ancient knowledge fell more and more
into corruption, when it was to be found only in echoes, in
symbolism. This was the time in the evolution of humanity when what
originated in the warm countries spread abroad. And what comes from
the warm countries is something that is not connected --- as is the
case in the cold countries --- with the intimate relation between
the seasons and man\'s own inner experiences. From the warm
countries came the impulse which resulted in the distribution of
conceptions and births over the whole year; this of course had
already happened in the South even in the days of the old, atavistic
clairvoyance, although it was still to some extent pervaded by the
old principles, the principles which prevailed in the times when in
the cold regions the Women held sway and in the South the Temple
Mysteries had long since superseded the old Nature-Mysteries. The
Southern practice spread towards the North, although a mixture of
the old still remained at the time when the Wanen gods were
superseded by the *Asen* gods. Just as the Wanen are connected
with *wähnen*, so are the Asen connected with the
German *sein* (being) --- that is to say, being or existence in the
material world which the mind tries to grasp externally. And when
the people of the North had entered into an age when individual
intelligence began to assert itself, when the Asen had supplanted
the Wanen, the old Mystery-customs fell into decadence. They passed
over into isolated, scattered Mystery-communities of the East. And
one Being only --- he in whom the whole meaning of the earth was to
be made new, he in whom the Christ was to dwell --- he alone was
destined to unite within himself what had once been the essence and
content of the Northern Mysteries.

Hence the origin of the account in Luke\'s Gospel of the appearance
of the Archangel Gabriel to Mary, is to be sought in the visions of
spiritual realities once reflected in the Nertus-symbol of the
ancient Northern Mysteries. The symbol had moved eastward. Spiritual
science discloses this today and this alone explains the meaning of
the Anglo-Saxon rune. For *Nertus* and *Ing* are the same. Of Ing it
is said: \"Ing was first seen among the East Danes. Later he went
towards the East. He walked over the waves, followed by his
chariot,\" --- over the waves of the clouds, that is, just as Nertus
moved over the waves of the clouds.

What had once been general in the colder regions, here
became *singular*, individual. It occurred as a single, unique
event, and we find it again in the descriptions given in the Gospel
of Luke.

But whatever has once existed in the world and has taken root,
whatever is anchored in the heart\'s understanding, remains a
possession of the soul. And when knowledge of Christianity was
received in the North from the Roman South, people felt --- not in
clear consciousness but in subconsciousness --- it had some
connection with an ancient Mystery-custom. Hence in the North, men
were able to develop a particularly intense feeling for *Jesus*. The
reality that had lived in the old Nertus Mystery had already sunk
into the subconscious, yet in the subconscious it was present, it
was sensed and dimly experienced.

When in those long past times in the far North, when the earth was
still covered with forests that were the home of the bison and the
elk, families came together in their snow-covered huts and under
their lantern-lights gathered around the new-born child, they spoke
of how with this new life there had been brought to them the new
light announced by the heavens in the previous spring. Such was the
ancient Christmas. To these people, who were one day to receive the
tidings of Christendom, it was said: In the hour that is especially
holy, one destined for greatness is born. It is the child who is the
first to be born after midnight in the night designated as *holy*.
And although people no longer possessed the ancient knowledge, when
the tidings came that such a one had been born in a distant land,
one in whom lived the Christ Who had come down from the world of the
stars to the earth, something of the old feeling came alive in them.

It is incumbent upon the present age to understand such things more
and more deeply and thereby grasp in concrete reality the meaning of
the evolution of earthly humanity. Truths of mighty, awe-inspiring
significance are contained in the Holy Scriptures, not just the
trivialities of which we so often hear in religious teachings today,
but sacred truths which thrill through the very fibres of our being,
stirring our hearts to the depths. These are truths which flow
through the whole evolution of humanity and resound in the Gospels.
And as spiritual science reveals their deep, deep source, the
Gospels will one day become a precious treasure, prized at their
true worth. People will know, then, why it is told in the Gospel of
Luke:

> > \"And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree
from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed. (And this
taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria). And all
went to be taxed, every one into his own city. And Joseph also went
up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the
city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the
house and lineage of David) to be taxed with Mary, his espoused
wife, being great with child. And so it was that while they were
there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. And
she brought forth her first-born son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for him
in the inn.\"

It was for Him, the first-born among men in whose souls the true
I-hood was to awaken, that the holy Mystery-power of ancient days
had passed over from the Danish peninsula to the distant East.

> > \"And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field,
keeping watch over their flock by night. And lo, the angel of the
Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about
them: and they were sore afraid.\"

Nerta too, moving across the land, had announced to the old
Wanen-consciousness, that is to say, in the subconsciousness of
atavistic clairvoyance, the arrival of human beings on the earth.

> > \"And the angel said unto them, Fear not; for behold I bring you
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto
you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ
the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you: Ye shall find the babe
wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there
was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God,
and saying ...\"

And now the heavenly Powers proclaimed what the Nerta-Priest in the
old Northern Mystery-cult had proclaimed to the woman about to
conceive.

> > \"The revelation of the Divine from the Heights takes place at the
time when there is peace among men who are of good-will.\"

As Tacitus narrates: \"Then there are joyous days and wedding
feasts. At those times no war is waged, no weapons are handled, the
sword is sheathed.\"

The great goal for which human beings must strive is the attainment
of the power to gaze into the course of the evolution of humanity.
For the Mystery of Golgotha, too, through which earth-evolution
received its deeper meaning, will become fully comprehensible when
its place in the evolution of humanity is understood. In future
times when, with the disappearance of materialism people will know,
not in abstract theory but as a concretely real experience, that he
is of *divine* origin, the ancient, holy Mystery-truths will again
be understood; then the intervening time will be over, a time in
which the Christ, it is true, lives on earth, but can be understood
only by the awakened consciousness. For the Gnostic conception of
Christ faded away; understanding for Jesus developed in connection
with the old Nertus cult, but in the unconscious. In the future,
however, humanity will have to bring both the unconscious streams to
consciousness, and unite them. And then an ever greater
understanding of the Christ will take hold on earth, an
understanding that will unite the Mystery-knowledge with a great and
renewed Gnosis.

Those who take the anthroposophical view of the world and the
movement associated with it seriously, will see in what it has to
say to mankind no child\'s play but great and earnest, soul-shaking
truths. And our souls must submit to this because it is right that
we should be shaken by greatness.

Not only is the earth a mighty living being; the earth is an exalted
spirit-being. And just as the greatest human genius could not stand
at the height he reaches in later life if he had not first developed
through childhood and adolescence, so the Mystery of Golgotha could
not have taken place, the Divine would not have been able to unite
with earth-evolution, if at the beginning of earthly days the Divine
--- in a different manner but in a manner still divine --- had not
descended to the earth. The form taken by the revelation of the
Divine from the heavenly heights was not the same in the ancient
Nertus cult as it was at a later time, but for all that it was a
true revelation.

The knowledge contained in this ancient wisdom was, it is true,
atavistic in character, but for all that it was infinitely more
exalted than the materialistic view of the world which, in the
sphere of knowledge, so brutally reduces humanity to the level of
the animal.

In Christianity we have to do with a f*act*, not with a theory. The
theory is a necessary consequence and of importance for the
consciousness that has had to develop in the further course of human
evolution. But the essence of Christianity as such, the Mystery of
Golgotha, is an accomplished fact. The impulse entered, to begin
with, into subconscious currents, as was still possible in Asia
Minor at the time when the union of Christ with the earth took
place.

Shepherds, men bearing a similarity with those among whom the Nertus
cult flourished, are also described in the Gospel of Luke. I can
give only very brief indications of these things. If we were able to
speak of them at greater length you would find that there are deep
foundations for what I have told you today. The human being has
descended from spiritual heights \... hence the revelation of the
Divine from the heavenly heights \... The revelation had to be
expressed in this form to those who out of the ancient wisdom knew
the destiny of man to be united with the secrets of the stars of
heaven. But what must live on earth as the result of Christ\'s union
with a man of earth --- that can be understood only very gradually.
The message is twofold: 'Revelation of the Divine from the heights'
--- 'Peace in the souls on earth who are of good-will.' Without this
second part Christmas, the Festival of the birth of *Christ*, has no
meaning!

Not only was Christ *born* for men; men have also crucified Him.
Even behind this lies necessity. But it is none the less true that
men have crucified the Christ! And it may dawn upon us that the
crucifixion on the wooden Cross on Golgotha was not the only
crucifixion. A time must come when the second part of the Christmas
proclamation becomes reality: 'Peace to the men on earth who are of
good-will.' For the negative side too is discernible. Men are very
far indeed from a true understanding of Christ and of the Mystery of
Golgotha.

Does it not cut to the very heart that we ourselves should be living
at a time when men\'s longing for peace is shouted down? ([^3])
It seems almost a mockery to celebrate Christmas in days when voices
are raised in outcry against the desire for peace. Today, when the
worst has not actually befallen, we can but fervently hope that a
change will take place in the souls of men, and a Christian feeling,
a will for peace supersede these demonstrations against the desire
for it. Otherwise it may not be those who are struggling in Europe
today, but those coming over from Asia, who will one day wreak
vengeance on this rejection of the desire for peace; it may be they
who will have to preach Christianity and the Mystery of Golgotha to
humanity on the ruins of European spiritual life. And then the
indelible record will remain: that at Christmas time, nineteen
hundred and sixteen years after the tidings of peace on earth to men
of good-will, humanity came to shout down the desire for peace.

May it not succeed! May the good Spirits who are at work in the
Christmas impulses protect European humanity from such a fate!

[^1]: Arius: \"The Son was once created out of nothing by the Divine
Will, was the first creature and the creator of the Universe,
hence to be called God, though subject to the Father,\" This was
declared heretical by the Council of Nicea in A.D. 325, and
replaced by the Athanasian principle of faith. \"The Son of God is
from eternity, not created, but begotten out of the Being of the
Father, and is of like nature to the Father. Streams of blood were
shed in consequence of these doctrines, impenetrable as they are
by the human mind (Weber: *Lehrbuch der Weltgeschichte*, 1875).

[^2]: "Mannus had three sons, after whom the people nearest the North
Sea are called Ingaevones, those of the centre, Hermiones, the
remainder Istae. (Germania 2).

[^3]: A reference to the agitation against the German proposal in
December, 1916 for peace negotiations during the First World War.

