# Toward a Better World

![](fight_hate.jpg){class="a"}


### Building a Movement for Social Justice in a Time of Peril

## By [Liz Theoharis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/) and [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

With the return of Donald Trump to the White House, advocates for peace,
social justice, racial and economic equality, fair immigration policies,
climate renewal, trans rights, and other movements for change are
bracing for hard times. The new administration will be doggedly opposed
to so many of the values we hold dear, as well as programs that have
helped keep millions of Americans above the poverty line.

Only recently, newly reelected Speaker of the House Mike Johnson
reaffirmed his commitment to an "[America
First"](https://mikejohnson.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=1514)
agenda, which distills the most harmful aspirations of the Heritage
Foundation's [Project 2025](https://www.project2025.org/) into 10
priority areas, including slashing social welfare, healthcare programs,
and public education; supporting increased military spending to promote
"peace through strength"; unleashing a nightmarish version of
immigration enforcement; and restricting voting rights.

Many of us are now asking ourselves, how did we end up here? Part of the
answer is simple enough: the status quo, regardless of which party has
been in power, simply hasn't been working for all too many Americans.
Research compiled by our colleague Shailly Gupta Barnes of the Kairos
Center indicates that some [140 million of
us](https://kairoscenter.org/kairos-center-policy-briefing-11-the-140-million-is-a-theory-of-change/)
live either in poverty or one financial emergency away from joining the
ranks of the poor. One out of six children in this country now lives
below the official poverty line and the families of [nearly
half](https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/news/nearly-half-american-children-living-near-poverty-line)
of all kids are in a state of economic precarity or food insecurity.
Meanwhile, the average life span of white American males is actually
[declining](https://www.verywellhealth.com/how-to-live-longer-for-men-2223908),
while more than [20
million](https://www.cnn.com/2024/04/12/politics/medicaid-coverage-health-insurance/index.html)
people lost their access to health care in 2024 alone.

All of this is, of course, a far cry from the conventional wisdom that
America's economy is doing well, based on statistics like the
unemployment rate or the rate of economic growth as a whole, none of
which capture the lived experience of so many of us. Indeed, the head of
Moody's Analytics recently told the [*Financial
Times*](https://www.ft.com/content/c755a34d-eb97-40d1-b780-ae2e2f0e7ad9)
that, while "high-income households are doing fine, the bottom third of
U.S. consumers are tapped out."

Although the system isn't working for millions of Americans, a
business-as-usual, market-based approach remains what's on offer in
official Washington. This has been the governing modus operandi across
party lines for the past 30 years and continues to enjoy bipartisan
support, even as faith in government declines in the country as a whole.
Without a viable plan that could change the basic living conditions of
people in need, it's easier for right-wing populists to offer false
promises of change or, even worse, provide scapegoats like undocumented
immigrants to "explain" declining living standards and the outright
desperation so many people now feel.

Of course, this propaganda is fueled by countless millions of dollars
contributed by [rich
donors](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/who-are-mega-rich-donors-backing-trump-2024-04-26/),
often enough billionaires, who, for starters, want more tax cuts, more
deregulation of business, unfettered access to [government
contracts](https://campaignlegal.org/update/musk-and-ramaswamy-stand-gain-even-more-wealth-serving-trumps-administration),
and free rein for
[cryptocurrency](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/what-does-a-trump-administration-mean-for-crypto).
It's reinforced by proponents of religious nationalism who organize
around single issues like opposition to
[abortion](https://www.the-independent.com/news/world/americas/us-politics/trump-christian-nationalism-abortion-ban-b2629614.html),
while falsely portraying moves towards racial and gender equality as
"[threats](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/23326492231160530)"
to Christian values. Over the past several years, such interests have
combined forces to usher Donald Trump back into the White House and
dozens of "Christian nationalists" into the judicial and legislative
branches of government, including [Speaker of the
House](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/11/01/opinion/mike-johnson-christian-nationalism-speaker.html)
Mike Johnson.

[Buy the Book](https://bookshop.org/p/books/you-only-get-what-you-re-organized-to-take-lessons-from-the-movement-to-end-poverty-liz-theoharis/21634785?ean=9780807008645)

Contrary to [mainstream
accounts](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/trumps-return-power-fueled-by-hispanic-working-class-voter-support-2024-11-06/)
that put the responsibility for Trump's rise and then return to power on
working-class voters (some of whom did indeed press the lever for him),
the real victors in the November elections were the wealthy and
powerful, many of whom used their public profiles and deep pockets to
help propel the Trump-Vance ticket to victory. They and their
corporations are now ready to receive ample [government
contracts](https://campaignlegal.org/update/musk-and-ramaswamy-stand-gain-even-more-wealth-serving-trumps-administration)
and benefit from the erasure of corporate regulations. Meanwhile,
religious extremists will welcome further encroachment on reproductive
and LGBTQ rights.

Case in point: on the day that Donald Trump was pronounced victorious in
the 2024 election, the eight richest men in the world were instantly
worth another [\$64
billion](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2024/nov/07/trump-victory-adds-record-wealth-richest-top-10).
Nevertheless, much of the analysis surrounding the 2024 elections
continues to emphasize the notion that [Trump's
victory](https://www.weekendreading.net/p/how-trump-won) was primarily
due to decisions made by the working class and the poorest Americans.

So, what is to be done? This is no time to blame those who are going to
be hurt by Trump's draconian policies, nor is it a moment to get in a
defensive crouch to fight off only the worst policies in the making
without also putting forth a vision of the world we'd actually like to
see, a world where people's needs are met with real programs, not
diversionary rhetoric and false promises.

**Promoting a Government That Works for All**

While people like billionaire Elon Musk are busy hatching schemes to
[dismantle large
parts](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/11/16/us/politics/dept-government-efficiency-explainer.html)
of the federal government, we need to push for an agenda in which the
government actually works for everyone. Shifting federal budget
priorities toward improving lives and away from war spending and tax
breaks for the rich would be a central element of such a program.
Pouring resources --- [more than a trillion
dollars](https://tomdispatch.com/fueling-the-warfare-state/) a year ---
into the war machine and the national security state starves other
priorities, ranging from public health to environmental protection. In
fact, defunding such programs, an essential part of Trump's second-term
plans, risks another pandemic or the
"[quad-demic](https://www.yahoo.com/news/public-health-experts-warning-quad-212352378.html)"
that health officials have been warning about, as well as increased
hunger, untreated medical conditions, and dirtier air and water. The
problems to come won't just involve an imbalance on a spreadsheet. There
are all too many [lives at
stake](https://news.ucr.edu/articles/2023/04/17/poverty-4th-greatest-cause-us-deaths),
as surely as lives are at stake in a shooting war.

Imagine how starkly different this country would be if we were to invest
in the lives of people rather than filling the coffers of the
military-industrial complex. Take the expanded (and fully refundable)
[child tax
credit](https://povertycenter.columbia.edu/publication/2021-child-poverty-reduction),
or CTC. Created in March 2021 through the American Rescue Plan, this
federal policy granted modest monthly cash payments to families with
children, including poor families, independent of their work or tax
status. Families making less than \$150,000 received regular cash
infusions they could use to pay daily expenses or shore up slim to
nonexistent savings.

The results were staggering. By [December
2021](https://povertycenter.columbia.edu/publication/montly-poverty-december-2021),
that program had reached more than 61 million children, nearly four
million of whom had been lifted above the official poverty line. In its
first and only year, official child poverty witnessed a [dramatic
decline](https://povertycenter.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/content/Publications/Child-Tax-Credit-Research-Roundup-One-Year-On-CPSP-2022.pdf),
the single largest drop in American history, including a 25% decrease in
poverty among Black children, narrowing the overall racial gap among
poor kids. At the time, Moody's
[estimated](https://www.moodysanalytics.com/-/media/article/2021/economic-assessment-of-bIden-fiscal-rescue-package.pdf?ftag=MSF0951a18)
that the impact of the CTC on the economy was comparable to, if not
greater than, the jobs created through military spending.

Despite its success, the expanded CTC was abandoned as 2021 ended. Two
Democrats and 49 Republicans voted to end it, with West Virginia
Democratic Senator Joe Manchin
[claiming](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/manchin-privately-raised-concerns-parents-would-use-child-tax-credit-n1286321)
that poor families might be using the money to buy drugs. The CTC, of
course, hadn't failed. The failure was that of an [impoverished
democracy](https://changewire.org/too-hungry-to-take-part-in-democracy/),
increasingly captive to the interests of the rich and powerful and
willing to leave nearly half the population living hand to mouth,
despite proven policies that could help lift the load of poverty.

And consider that the real danger of the second Trump administration,
which has already appointed a [record 13
billionaires](https://abcnews.go.com/US/trump-tapped-unprecedented-13-billionaires-top-administration-roles/story?id=116872968)
to government posts, is its debt to the enormously wealthy at the
expense of the rest of us. You need look no further than Trump's cozy
relationship with [future
trillionaire](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/article/2024/sep/07/elon-musk-first-trillionaire-2027)
Elon Musk. As co-head of the new Department of Government Efficiency, or
DOGE, with business interests in the very institutions he'll have some
authority over, Musk will also, it seems, have an undue influence on
future federal budgets, priorities, and programs. Indeed, DOGE co-chairs
Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy have already [set their
sights](https://gfmag.com/economics-policy-regulation/department-of-government-efficiency-doge-massive-cuts/)
on shutting down the Department of Education and cutting about one-third
of the federal government's annual budget, or \$2 trillion.

We're preparing for this and more in the coming weeks and months, but it
doesn't need to be this way.

**What Is to Be Done?**

In 1968, as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was organizing against the
triple evils of racism, militarism, and poverty in what would be the
last crusade of his life, [he
said](https://kairoscenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/King-quotes-PPC-Dec-2016-2.pdf),
"Power for poor people will really mean having the ability, the
togetherness, the assertiveness, and the aggressiveness to make the
power structure of this nation say yes when they may be desirous to say
no." His [theory of
change](https://www.civilrightsmuseum.org/50-voices-for-50-years/posts/poverty-racism-and-the-legacy-of-kings-poor-peoples-campaign)
was to turn those most adversely impacted by poverty into a political
force powerful enough not to be denied, even by the greatest economic
and military power in the world.

Under the second Trump administration, there will be a torrent of
emergencies to deal with, including threats of [mass
deportation](https://immigrantjustice.org/know-your-rights/mass-deportation-threats),
the shredding of the [social safety
net](https://www.npr.org/2024/11/25/nx-s1-5184462/the-countrys-social-safety-net-could-be-in-danger-as-trump-looks-to-slash-spending),
and attacks on efforts to promote racial and economic justice and gender
equality. Some of this will be new to us, including potentially massive
immigration raids on schools and churches, while much of it has already
been unfolding at a state level. For example, [in 2024
alone](https://translegislation.com/), more than 650 bills were
introduced nationwide to restrict the rights of trans people. Because
such bills were massively unpopular, well over 600 of them failed. This
may change, however, if they're taken up at the federal level in 2025.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1568586973/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

As people of conscience fight back against such assaults, we should
connect that resistance to calls for a government that reflects our
deepest values and commitments to justice. To fight for such a future
means making demands that are far beyond what's politically possible
now. Simply resisting what Donald Trump's government tries to do won't
be enough. We need to build public support for a robust, carefully
crafted plan for public investment that will be a viable stepping-stone
toward a more equitable, peaceful, and just world.

During the first Trump administration, the Poor People's Campaign: A
National Call for Moral Revival produced an ambitious social and
economic agenda, "[The Poor People's Moral Budget: Everybody's Got a
Right to
Live](https://www.poorpeoplescampaign.org/resource/poor-peoples-moral-budget/)."
It called for the right to living-wage jobs, affordable housing, debt
cancellation, strong anti-poverty programs, guaranteed adequate income,
and much more. It made clear that, through far fairer taxation and the
shifting of funds from bloated military budgets to programs of social
uplift, it would be possible to "lift from the bottom" in America.

Imagine a country where everyone could exist free of the fear of
poverty, hunger, homelessness, or lack of access to quality health care.
Of course, trying to shift this country's priorities in such a way would
pose a major political challenge, but social and political organizations
and movements have succeeded in the past, even in the darkest of times.
The organizing of the Citizen's Army during the [Mine
Wars](https://wvminewars.org/what-were-the-mine-wars) in West Virginia
early in the last century and the birth of the labor union movement
successfully pressured both corporations and the government for better
wages and working conditions that workers still benefit from today. In
the midst of the Great Depression of the 1930s, military veterans in the
[Bonus Army
Encampment](https://prologue.blogs.archives.gov/2020/07/15/the-1932-bonus-army-black-and-white-americans-unite-in-march-on-washington/)
in Washington, D.C., demanded that the government pay those promised
"bonuses" and won. The Black Panther Party's [Free Breakfast
Programs](https://www.history.com/news/free-school-breakfast-black-panther-party)
fed more children in the late 1960s than any other institutional entity.
It paved the way for free breakfast and lunch programs in public schools
across the country, while calling out the failures of the government to
provide life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness for all people.
During those same years, [welfare
rights](https://economicsecurityproject.org/news/the-national-welfare-rights-organization-wanted-economic-justice-for-black-americans￼/)
leaders formed the largest poor people's organization of the time and
secured essential benefits for tens of thousands of people, while more
than doubling the amount of federal support flowing to the poorest
Americans.

Because they did it then, we can do it now.

This is not to suggest that shifting funds from the Pentagon to domestic
programs is a magic solution to America's economic problems. Even
cutting the Pentagon budget in half would not be enough to meet all this
country's unmet needs. That would require a comprehensive package,
involving a major shift in budget priorities, an increase in federal
revenues, and a crackdown on waste, fraud, and abuse in the expenditure
of government loans and grants. It would, in fact, require the kind of
attention and focus now reserved for war planning.

Imagine a real war on poverty, not the
["skirmish"](https://www.crmvet.org/docs/mlkviet2.htm#:~:text=We%20have%20escalated%20the%20war,and%20adequate%20anti%2Dpoverty%20programs.)
(as Dr. King called it) of the 1960s, President Lyndon Johnson's effort
that would be cut short by the war in Vietnam. What's needed is a
coordinated series of campaigns that could change the conditions that
produce poverty for good.

Now, let's be real: 2025 is going to be a truly hard year for the poor
and vulnerable in our society. But the promise and possibility of ending
poverty, reclaiming democracy, and advancing peace and justice remain
closer than any of us may think. What's needed is to begin to build
something better, with, as Dr. King suggested, "the ability, the
togetherness, the assertiveness, and the aggressiveness" to make it so.

Copyright 2025 Liz Theoharis and William D. Hartung

Featured image: [Poor People's Campaign: Call for Moral Revival. US
Capitol, Washington,
DC](https://flickr.com/photos/leeanncafferata/28462272348/in/photolist-2iCunoR-Kn7zXA-JPxyBa-HR3wqF-JPxzhZ-276LH9Z-25Hqrcd-JPxAcK-276HhqX-JPxz3a-28ts1Ux-JPxxuF-28p5dcG-JPxyUp-276Hj22-25Hu3SL-276LNgx-2nsTXMa-2pBi7Q4-25HqqUQ-276Hh7R-28trWpk-25Hu4gG-28trWkH-28ts21K-28ts1Q4-276LPYv-276LPSZ-JPxyhH-JPxxwV-276Hkk4-JPxzUk-JPxzxP-2pBgGRz-276LH2V-276Hjwa-2pBbkJP-276Hkex-2pBfK6z-276LHoB-276LP8x-2pBhnrS-276Hiqn-276LHeD-2pBgGJ5-276Hk1r-28p5cM3-28ts2d8-25Hu435)
by [Leeann Cafferata](https://flickr.com/photos/leeanncafferata/)
licensed under [CC BY-ND
2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/2.0/) / Flickr

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Liz Theoharis](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/)

**Liz Theoharis**,
a [*TomDispatch* regular](https://tomdispatch.com/lifting-from-the-bottom/),
is a theologian, ordained minister, and anti-poverty activist. Director
of the [Kairos Center for Religions, Rights and Social
Justice](http://www.kairoscenter.org/) and co-chair of the [Poor
People's Campaign: A National Call for Moral
Revival](http://www.poorpeoplescampaign.org/), she is the author of the
forthcoming book [*You Only Get What You're Organized to Take: Lessons
from the Movement to End
Poverty*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0807008648/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
and  [*Always With Us? What Jesus Really Said About the
Poor*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0802875025/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
Follow her on BlueSky at
[\@liztheo](https://twitter.com/liztheo)haris.kairoscenter.org.

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/liztheoharis/)

#### [William D. Hartung](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

**William D. Hartung**, a [*TomDispatch
*regular](https://tomdispatch.com/what-price-defense-2/), is a senior
research fellow at the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft and
the author of [*Prophets of War: Lockheed Martin and the Making of the
Military-Industrial
Complex*](https://www.amazon.com/Prophets-War-Lockheed-Military-Industrial-Complex/dp/1568586973)*. *

[See All Articles](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamhartung/)

## Thanks to \<a href=\"https://TomDispatch.com\"\>TomDispatch.com\</a\>where this article originally appeared. 
