![](exiles-end-main.jpg){class="a"}

# Exile's End: a Memoir

### Episode Five

## by Frank Thomas Smith

#### The Army Language School

The Language School was like a free-of-charge university including room
and board. And the food was excellent, way above the normal army fare.
We were a Russian class of about eighty students, divided into groups of
eight. The teachers were all Russian native speakers, although not
necessarily professional educators. But they were all well-educated, at
least in Russian. We had class five hours a day, five days a week. With
that kind of immersion it would be hard not to learn something, even a
lot. Our fun teacher was Romanov, a nephew of Czar Nicholas II, who had
been murdered by the Bolsheviks. He was kind of decadent, but had a
sense of humor and taught us all the dirty words in Russian, of which
there are plenty. His method of correcting pronunciation was by
shouting: "There are no cows in Mask-va!" (correct pronunciation of
\"Moscow.")

#### The Gilded Cage

One night I went to the Gilded Cage in town and was dressed accordingly:
blue sports jacket, slacks, loafers without socks, white shirt open to
the third button. I arrived early and found a stool at the semi-circular
bar, put a fiver on the bar for effect, ordered a Millers High Life, lit
a cigarette, and looked around. The bar stools were almost all occupied
--- by men. Soon they\'d be three deep, it being Friday night. The piano
was set back in an alcove to the left- rear of the bar. It also had bar
stools around it so you could drink there and look at the player with
one elbow on the piano. Two young couples were perched on the stools,
the men in suits and ties and the giggly women showing a lot of leg. The
men were probably asshole officers from Fort Ord, I figured. The piano
player was playing As Time Goes By, probably requested by one of the
girls. That kind of girl always requested that kind of song because they
liked to think of themselves as Ingrid Bergman --- romantic and teary
--- without realizing that it wasn\'t a song you could request, it had
to hit you out of the blue. I lit another cigarette and nursed my beer.

The Gilded Cage wasn\'t really my kind of place, primarily because they
only served bottled beer which cost two bits, except for Miller\'s High
Life, which went for thirty cents. Hell, you could get a good glass of
draft beer anywhere else for a dime. There were other things I didn\'t
like about it, such as the yellow birdcage hanging over the bar with a
live parakeet in it and the bartender wearing a tie and garters on his
sleeves. I wondered what it felt like to be a caged bird in that dump.
The whole place was like a trinket you could buy in the five-and-ten.
And the customers --- mostly what you'd call gay today but what we
called something else then --- thought they were hot shit with their
sports jackets and ties and wavy hair and loud laughs. About the only
thing good about the Gilded Cage was the piano player, who could play
anything you requested. You had to tip him or buy him a drink every time
you made a request though, so I never requested anything because I was
only a private in the United States Army and my budget didn\'t include
tips, except to waitresses. In fact, I'd only been in the Gilded Cage
once before, on a payday, when I wandered in half-drunk without knowing
what kind of place it was. Monterey was full of cheap bars and the only
reason to go to an expensive one would be on the chance of picking up a
girl, which was damn hard in a town that had the Army Language School
right up the hill in the Presidium and Fort Ord about three miles away.
Monterey wasn\'t Steinbeck\'s Cannery Row anymore, and it hadn\'t yet
become a snooty extension of Carmel and Pacific Grove.

\"Nice song,\" a guy said who sidled up next to me. I nodded and looked
at him in the mirror. In his thirties I guessed, suntanned, casually
well dressed. He was smiling at my profile. \"And from a nice picture,\"
I agreed.

\"Saw it three times myself,\" the guy said. \"You?\"

\"About the same.\"

\"You want your drink here, Jacky?\" the bartender asked the guy. \"Yes,
thank you, Sal.\"

The bartender went to the end of the bar and came back with a glass with
an inch of whiskey and soda in it. He put a coaster in front of Jacky
and placed the drink on it.\"That was hardly worth the trip, Sal,\"
Jacky said, grinning.

Sal grinned back and went off to tend a customer. I drank down my beer,
knowing I wouldn\'t have to nurse it any longer. Jacky drank his down
too. \"Let me buy you a drink. Wouldn\'t you prefer scotch?\"

\"No, I\'ll stick with Millers thanks.\" A subtle answer, so Jacky
wouldn\'t get the right idea.

\"Suit yourself,\" he said. \"Sal, another scotch for me and a Millers
for \... What did you say your name was?\"

\"Frank.\"

\"For Frank,\" Jacky said smoothly, more to me than to the bartender,
who had moved on anyway.

\"Thanks.\"

\"Cigarette?\" He held a pack of filter-tipped Parliaments, though my
Marlboro\'s were plainly visible on the bar. What the hell, I thought,
why waste them? and took a Parliament. Jacky\'s gold- plated lighter
flicked open under my nose so I didn\'t even have to lean forward to
reach the tiny flame. I dragged and could hardly taste the smoke,
because of the dammed filter-tip.

\"Thanks.\"

\"Are you from around here, Frank?\"

\"No, New York.\" Actually Brooklyn, but that always caused a laugh or
some wiseguy remark, so I had learned to say New York instead. Hell,
most people west of New Jersey didn\'t even know that Brooklyn is in New
York City.

\"You don\'t sound like you\'re from New York.\"

One thing good about learning a foreign language is that you have to
concentrate on your pronunciation, and I had begun to watch my English
to weed out the Brooklynese.\"Well, I am.\"

\"In the army here?\"

\" Yeah. \"

\"Ford Ord?\"

\"Language School.\"

\"Thank God!\"

I looked at him. \"Why?\"

\"Well, you know,\" Jacky said smiling, \"you can at least have an
intelligent conversation with a Language School student, which isn\'t
often the case with the ones from Fort Ord. You\'re an officer, I
suppose.\"

\"Why do you suppose that? Officers are assholes.\"

He laughed loudly. \"Frank, you\'re a man after my own heart, and
you\'re absolutely right. Officers are assholes.\"

I glanced at the couples at the piano, but they obviously couldn\'t
hear. \"So why did you suppose I was one?\"

\"Oh god, please don\'t be angry. I just wanted to know, and I couldn\'t
very well have said: You\'re a private, I suppose? I mean what if you
were an officer. Where would I be then?\"

\"Up shit\'s creek?\" I laughed as I said it.

\"Absolutely.\"

\"Not many officers in the Language School,\" I said. I liked the game
of denigrating officers but kept my voice low. \"They\'re too dumb.\"

\"I agree, absolutely, at least the few I\'ve met.\"

I didn\'t say anything. I was waiting for the proposition. \"What
language are you studying?\" Jacky asked.\"Russian.\"

\"Russian? Wo w, t h a t must be difficult.\"

\"Yeah, but it\'s better than Korean or Chinese.\"

\"Oh God, yes. I speak some French myself, but I\'d never think of
trying a difficult language like Russian. Whatever made you pick it?\"

\"I didn\'t have much choice. They called a few of us to Classification
and Assignment one day in Basic Training and said that the tests showed
we had linguistic abilities and offered a choice between Swedish,
Russian, Korean and Chinese Mandarin, we should write down our
preference. I put Russian because I\'d like to be able to read
Dostoevsky and Tolstoy in the original. So I got it --- Russian I mean.
The others all put down Swedish and none of them got anything. They\'re
in Korea now."

\"I love Dostoevsky,\" Jacky crooned.

\"Yeah, well I\'m still far away from being able to read him in Russian,
the way the course is going, prisoner interrogation exercises, that kind
of shit.\"

\"How long have you been here?\"

\"Two months.\"

\"So, you have ten months left?\"

So, Jacky knew that Russian was a year-long course. Well, why not? He
was from around here.

\"That\'s right.\"

\"Wonderful!\" He patted the back of my hand. \"We have time to get
acquainted.\"

\"Here it comes,\" I thought. \"Yeah, but I doubt if there\'s time to
learn enough Russian to read Dostoevsky or Tolstoy in the original.
They\'re tough.\"\"Would you be very disappointed if you couldn\'t,
Frank?\"

\"Not very, but disappointed, sure, I guess.\"

\"I think it\'s a question of what one expects from life. If one has no
expectations, one can\'t be disappointed. Don\'t you think so?\"

\"Well, I think life would be pretty boring without expectations.\"
\"But not disappointing.\"

\"I don\'t know about that.\"

\"Have you ever been disappointed, Frank,\" Jacky asked and laughed. \"I
don\'t know where you find room for all that beer. Sal, another round,
please.\"

\"You\'re keeping up with me.\"

\"Yes, but there\'s less liquid involved.\"

\"More potent liquid though...and yes, I have.\"

\"Have what, Frank?\"

\"Yes, I have been disappointed.\"

\"But you\'re so young to have been disappointed, unless in love.\" He
smiled. Actually, he was a handsome guy. \"But then Romeo was awfully
young. Have you been disappointed in love then, Frank? I have, often.\"

\"Yeah, especially the last time,\" I said, wondering why I was about to
tell him about Olga when I hadn\'t mentioned her to anyone else, not
even my buddies up at the Presidium. I was too young to know that we are
always on the lookout for a sympathetic listener. And Jacky was
certainly one, while my buddies would only have shaken their heads and
laughed.

\"Oh, do tell me.\" Jacky leaned to his left until our shoulders were
touching and looked at me intently, ready to listen.

\"Well, I went up to San Francisco \...\" I didn\'t mention that it had
been last weekend. I had driven up alone in my 1949 Hudson Hornet the
Friday after payday, alone because I'm a loner, that\'s what people said
about me and I suppose it was true. I had only one real friend on the
hill in the Language School, Jim McCrea, but Jim was Black (called
"Negro" back then) which was a big disadvantage when girls were
involved. In fact, it was a disadvantage when anything was involved once
you got off base. There was no Jim Crow in California like in the South,
but there was a more subtle discrimination. Jim and I had driven around
sightseeing and had eaten together in restaurants and went to Shorty\'s
bar, which was just outside the base, at least once a week to drink ten
cent beer and listen to jazz on the jukebox they had there and talk a
lot. But whenever there were likely looking girls in the place, which
wasn\'t often, I regretted being with Jim because it was impossible to
pick up a couple of white girls --- and they were always white and
always in pairs --- if you were with Jim. Even if you went to town you
might get into trouble if some townie or redneck from Fort Ord decided
to pick a fight because Jim was black. Jim knew it, of course, so he
never went to the bars in town. It was a rotten situation that I hated,
but if you were after pussy that was how it was and if I had to choose
between pussy --- or the chance of it --- and Jim ... well, that\'s the
way it was.

It took about three hours to get to Frisco because there was no good
thruway yet. Once there I checked into the YMCA for three bucks a night
that I paid in advance and went cruising. I had consumed a lot of beer
by the time I walked into that bar without noticing its name --- an
oversight I would eternally regret.

It was about midnight and the place was jumping. There was a rectangular
bar, served by bartenders on all four sides, a crowded dance floor and
booths. The first unusual thing was that there was a dance floor at all,
the second that the place was well lighted instead of half-dark. It was
the antithesis of the Gilded Cage. I stood at the bar and ordered a Bud
draft. The booths ran all along the walls and I inspected them. There
were a lot of girls in the place, but they were already with guys. I
regretted that I hadn\'t found the place sooner. Now I\'d have to try to
cut someone out or wait for someone new to come in.

Then I spotted Olga. Although there must have been a lot of servicemen
there --- we were in the middle of the Korean War after all --- none
were in uniform except the sailor in a funny uniform who was sitting in
the booth across from her. The sailor moved his hand brusquely and
knocked over a wine bottle. The girl tried to wipe the spilled wine with
a paper napkin while he laughed. He must have been drunk. I saw my
opportunity and grabbed a rag from the sink below the bar and walked
over to them. \"You won\'t get it dry with that piece of paper, Miss,\"
I said, and wiped up the beer. The sailor clapped me on the shoulder
laughing and said something in French.

\"What\'d he say?\" I asked her.

\"He thinks you\'re a waiter. He asked for another bottle of wine.\" She
smiled at me, and I smiled back. She had an accent which I recognized,
having heard it often enough during the past two months.

\"He looks like he\'s had enough,\" I said. \"But hey, I\'m not a
waiter, so don\'t ask me.\"

The Frenchy suddenly keeled over on his side.

\"What\'d I tell you?\" I pushed him upright and sat down next to him
across from the girl and the sailor slumped against me. \"You\'re
Russian, aren\'t you?\"

\"Does it show so much?\"

I looked her over carefully as if to decide whether it showed. Her
cheekbones were a little high, eyes set wide apart, full lips. Her brown
hair flowed over her shoulders front and back with ragged bangs on her
forehead. She was wearing a greenish print dress that looked like it
came straight out of a World War II Care package. Her bosom was full,
apparent although the dress was buttoned up almost to her neck to anyone
who looked, and I was looking. No makeup. Pretty. She looked very young
at first glance, but her eyes were older.

\"No,\" I said, \"I recognize the accent.\"

\"Most people think I\'m Polish. How did you guess I\'m Russian?\"
\"That\'s because there\'s so many Poles around and not many

Russians,\" I said. \"I recognized the accent because I\'m around
Russians all the time. I\'m studying Russian at the Army Language
School. Ya izuchayu russkie Yazuik f'armeskiye shkole Yizikom.\"

At that she clapped her hands happily and let out a stream of Russian of
which I only caught a few words.

\"Hey, wait a minute, I\'ve only been at it a couple of months." She
repeated it slowly and, though I still didn\'t understand everything, I
got the drift: \"How wonderful. The only people I know here who speak
Russian are Russians, and they bore me.\"

\"Do I bore you?\"

\"Of course not. That\'s what I meant.\" We both smiled. The juke box
started to play As Time Goes By and I tried to think of the word for
dance in Russian and finally decided that I never knew it.

\"Would you like to dance?\"

\"Konyechno.\"

I pushed the sailor away until he was leaning against the wall, but not
until after his head bounced against it.

\"Be careful!\" she cried.

\"Don\'t worry,\" I said as we walked to the dance floor, \"he can feel
no pain. "Where did you ever find that guy?\"

\"He\'s a friend of my uncle who lives in Paris. Actually, he\'s the son
of my uncle\'s friend.\" She looked back at the sailor. \"His ship sails
at dawn and he has to get back somehow.\"

We began a bit stiffly, but she was soon snuggling up against me and I
could smell the delicate perfume of her hair. I pulled my crotch back so
she wouldn\'t feel my incipient erection, not yet anyway.

\"Kak vasho imyo?\" I asked, the easiest question there was. She laughed
though.

\"What\'s so funny?\"

\"You\'re so formal. My name is Olga, but you would normally use the
familiar form of the pronoun under the present circumstances: Kak tvayo
imyo?\"

\"We haven\'t had the familiar form yet.\"

\"Well, we can\'t very well continue as if I were your professor, so we
better speak English.\"

\"Excellent idea, Olga. I love your name.\"

\"Oh dear, and it\'s such a common name in Russia.\"

\"Not here. Here it\'s beautiful --- to me at least.\"

\"And your name?\" she asked leaning back to look in my eyes, which
caused her hips to swivel into me.

\"Frank.\" My erection was in full bloom. I moved back so it was only
touching her lightly.

\"You don\'t have to do that,\" she said. \"I like it.\"

Godamm, my dream had been answered, my ship had come in. I was on the
verge of shacking up in Frisco with a beautiful Russian woman, who not
only liked hard-ons and wasn\'t afraid to say so, but could help me
learn Russian.

A Chubby Checker teenybop number blasted out of the jukebox and Olga
said she didn\'t like it so we went to the bar instead of back to the
booth, where Frenchy was still out cold. She didn\'t want anything more
to drink though, said she already had too much wine. I ordered a beer,
drank it down and ordered another. I had worked up a real thirst from
dancing and the expectation of what was to come --- that night and many
future weekends.

Olga took a sip of my beer. \"I don\'t think that Philippe is in any
condition to get back to his ship,\" she said, frowning.

\"He\'s only asleep,\" I said. \"He\'ll be all right.\"

\"I hope so.\" She looked at her watch. \"It\'s almost two o\'clock.\"
\"Good. This place will be open another hour. Let\'s dance.\" The

divine Sarah Vaughan was singing A Foggy Day. She meant in London town,
but San Francisco town was pretty foggy too.

\"I don\'t know how he\'ll get back to his ship.\"

\"After this number we\'ll go back, wake him up and put him in a cab,\"
I said, hoping that either the sailor or she had money to pay for it.

\"Oh no, we couldn\'t do that.\"

\"He\'s probably got m o n ey, sailors always do after hoarding it up at
sea.\"

\"That\'s just it,\" she protested. \"You know what taxi drivers are
like. A drunk sailor. He\'d be robbed ...\"

\"Rolled,\" I corrected her. \"Not necessarily. All cabbies aren\'t
crooks. Why are you worrying about him so much anyway?\" I didn\'t want
to sound jealous, but I was.

\"Don\'t you see? I\'m responsible for him. They gave him my name in
Paris because they knew he was coming here. He called me --- he\'s very
nice when he\'s sober --- and I took him out to see San Francisco. He
had too much to drink. If anything happens to him, I\'d be responsible.
Do you see?\"\"Yeah, I guess so.\"

\"You have a car, Frank. Could you take him?\"

\"Well, I don\'t know,\" though I did know: I couldn\'t refuse her.
\"Where\'s his ship at?\"

He said it was at l\'ille du tresor. Was it a joke?\"

\"No, that would be Treasure Island, it\'s a naval base under the Bay
Bridge to Oakland.\"

\"So you know it!\"

\"I passed it a couple of times going over the bridge, that\'s all. I
saw the sign.\"

\"Will you take him, Frank, please?\"

\"OK., we\'ll all go.\" I tried to push her into dance mode again, but
she stood still.

\"No, I\'m a foreigner, they wouldn\'t let me in. And \... well \... my
papers aren\'t completely in order yet.\"

Shit. Was she a spy? Were they both spies? Who cares. "But you\'re in
the military. They\'d let you in. I\'ll wait here for you.\"

\"What if this place is closed when I get back? You can\'t stand waiting
on the corner at three o\'clock in the morning.\"

Her eyes opened wide; they were green like her dress. \"I\'ll give you
my telephone number. If it\'s closed when you get back, call me.\" She
smiled. \"I\'ll be waiting.\"

My first priority had been to go to her place when the bar closed.
Failing that, I wanted her phone number. I wasn\'t sure that she\'d give
it to me. After all, I was only a barroom pick up. Now, however, I was
sure of getting it, and I couldn\'t refuse her any way. \"Okay,\" I
said, \"let\'s get it over with.\"

We went back to the booth, and I shook Frenchy and slapped his cheeks.
He woke up and babbled in French.

Olga took one of the paper napkins from its holder and wrote her
telephone number on it. I put it in my pocket, I couldn\'t remember
which one afterwards, although I certainly thought about it a lot.

\"C\'mon Robespierre, let\'s get you presentable.\" I pulled him across
the booth seat and got him standing.

\"What are you doing?\" Olga asked.

\"Taking him to the john to put some cold water on his face and get him
to take a leak or he\'ll piss all over the car.\"

\"Jesus, I never saw anyone so drunk from wine,\" I said as we
maneuvered him out of the bar upon our return from the men\'s room.
\"Refused to piss, that\'s his problem.\"

\"He was a little tipsy when he came to my place,\" Olga said, sounding
as though she was defending him. \"Who knows how much he had to drink.\"

My car was a block away and as the three of us weaved downhill the
sailor started singing --- in French of course.

\"Christ, just what I needed,\" I said. \"Tell him to shut up before the
MPs hear him, or SPs if that\'ll impress him more.\"

He shut up quick when Olga translated. We dumped him in the front seat
of the Hudson and Olga kissed me on the lips, not passionately, but
lovingly yes, I decided.

I took some wrong turns, so it took longer to find the Bay Bridge than
I\'d expected. The fog had gotten worse, so I had to drive more
carefully than usual. I remembered that the sign to Treasure Island was
somewhere near the middle of the bridge, so I hugged the right lane in
order not to miss the turn-off, which was on the bridge itself. The fog
was even thicker on the bridge, and I drove slowly, hunched over the
steering wheel. Then I felt the car descending and had a sinking feeling
in my stomach. I had missed the exit to Treasure

Island. And I couldn\'t very well make a U-turn on a bridge when I

couldn\'t see what might be coming from the other direction. So, I

had to continue into Oakland, turn and go back over the bridge. I knew
there was only one turn-off, and it was on the right side going towards
Oakland. So, I had to drive all the way back into Frisco, turn and head
back to Oakland.

This time I went ten miles an hour and finally saw the sign: it was
hanging over the middle of the bridge, that\'s why I hadn\'t seen it the
first time across. They must have moved it. I cursed and eased the
Hudson down the ramp onto Treasure Island and stopped at the guard
booth.

\"Where ya goin\', sir,\" a huge SP said. The \"sir\" was just in case I
was an officer.

\"I\'m trying to get this French sailor back to his ship,\" I said,
trying to sound like one.

\"Uh huh. ID, please.\"

I showed him my ID, which definitely established my non-officer status.

\"Where ya stationed, soldier?\" the SP asked.

\"Army Language School, Monterey.\"

\"What\'s the matter with ya friend?\"

I looked over at the sailor, who had fallen asleep again. \"He had one
too many, I guess.\" I gave him a jab in the chest with my elbow to wake
him up. \"He\'s French.\"

\"Yeah, I had a bunch of \'em rollin\' in tonight. What about you?\"
\"No sweat, I\'m okay.\"

\"You better be. I keep your ID and you can pick it up when you leave.\"
He noted down the Hudson\'s license plate number on a chart and went
back into his booth.

\"Hey,\" I yelled, \"can you tell me where the French ship is?\" The SP
checked a chart hanging in the booth and said: \"Pier 21.

Go straight till ya can\'t no more, turn right till ya can\'t no more,
then right again and that\'s it. Got a French flag on it I guess.\"

\"What\'s a French flag look like?\"

\"How the fuck should I know.\"

I followed the SP\'s instructions and found the ship. An armed French
sailor on guard duty was standing at the foot of the gangplank. I looked
at my watch: three o\'clock. Shit, the bar was closing. What\'s it
called? \"Hey, Frenchy,\" I said to the sailor, \"what\'s the name of
that bar we were in?\"

He looked at me blankly.

\"Comment lapel le bar?\" No reaction.

\"Hey,\" I called to the guard, \"come and get this asshole.\" He
didn\'t move. I got out, opened the door and dragged Frenchy out. Then I
grabbed the hat with the red pompon from the seat and placed it on his
head and pushed him at the sailor, who had no choice but to catch him.

\"Adieu, shitheads.\"

I parked on a deserted street in San Francisco and looked through my
pockets for the napkin. It wasn\'t there. I looked desperately, turning
my pockets out. Then I took a flashlight from the glove compartment and
searched the car --- floor, seats, everywhere. No napkin.

\"Can we help you, sir?\" one of the two MPs who appeared behind me
said.

\"No, I was just looking for sumpin.\" Damn it, I wasn\'t drunk anymore,
why was I slurring my speech.\"You in the service?\"

\"Yeah. Who isn\'t?\" Wise guys answers, just what MPs like to h e a r.

\"Let\'s see your ID.\"

Here we go again.

Finally, they let me go but made me leave my car where it was, claiming
I was drunk, and told me to go right back to the Y and if they saw me
again that night, I\'d spend the rest of it in the clink.

All day and most of the night Sunday I searched for the bar where I had
found and lost Olga but didn\'t find it. It was as if it had vanished
into thin air or never really existed. At five o\'clock in the morning I
drove back to Monterey. I had to be in class at eight and sick calls on
Monday mornings were frowned upon.

\"Frank,\" Jacky said with a crooked smile, \"I can imagine how you
felt---and I\'m sorry, truly I am.\"

My glass was empty, and I called Sal without bothering to wait for Jacky
to invite me to have another.

\"On the other hand, I think it goes to prove my thesis.\"

\"Oh yeah? How\'s that?\"

\"Well, if you hadn\'t had the expectation that you\'d found the perfect
shack job who would help you with Russian as well, you wouldn\'t have
been disappointed when she didn\'t materialize. See what I mean?\"

\"Yeah, I guess so.\" But it was more than that. I had fallen head over
heels in love with Olga and I needed to find her. No need to tell Jackie
that though.

As Time Goes By was being played again.

\"God, I\'m beginning to hate that song,\" Jacky said. \"Me too.\" I
hadn\'t mentioned the detail that that was the song Olga and I had first
danced to.

\"What kind of music do you like, Frank, I mean really like?\"

\"Oh, you know, Jazz, blues. Sarah Vaughan knocks me out, but I guess
she\'s not coming in here.\"

\"My God, Frank, I knew we were kindred spirits,\" Jacky gushed.
\"Listen, I have an idea.\"

Here it comes, finally.

\"Let\'s go to my place. I have the most fantastic jazz collection you
ever heard, including plenty of Sarah Vaughan, before she went
commercial.\"

\"I like her commercial too.\"

\"Well so do I, but the non-commercial stuff is better, believe me. How
about it?\"

\"Sounds good. Where do you live?\"

\"Carmel.\" Exactly where I had guessed he lived.

\"Oh, no then, I couldn\'t go there.\"

\"Why in heaven\'s name not?\"

\"No gas.\"

Jacky laughed, obviously much relieved. \"No problem my dear friend,
we\'ll go in my car and I\'ll bring you back later, if you like, or
tomorrow. I have plenty of room.\"

\"Naw, I always like to have my own wheels,\" I intoned, smoking calmly.
\"Thanks anyway.\"

Jacky laughed again. \"Frank, you\'re amazing. You make problems out of
nothing. Come on, let\'s get gas for your car, silly.\"

"I\'m afraid I\'m sort of broke, Jacky,\" I said, although there were
still four dollars and seventy cents in front of me on the bar.\"I had
no intention of letting you pay for it even if you had the money. When
you\'re my guest it means in everything.\" He clapped me on the
shoulder. \"Sal, my bill, please!\"

I only needed about a dollar\'s worth of gas to get to Carmel and back,
but I told the attendant at the service station to fill it up. I looked
at my watch: ten o\'clock, plenty of time. Jacky had pulled his white
Mercedes into the station away from the pumps and stood waiting with his
arms folded and a big grin on his face. When the attendant hung up the
gas hose he strolled over and paid for my gas.

\"Follow me, okay Frank? Can\'t lose that car.\" He put his wallet in
his pocket and started back to his Mercedes whistling As Time Goes By,
realized it and stopped.

\"Jacky,\" I called.

\"Yes, Frank?\" He turned around and came back. \"What is it?\" \"I\'m
not going to your place, Jacky. I needed the gas to get to

Frisco, see? To look for Olga.\"

Jacky was openly crestfallen, but he didn\'t beg, I have to give him
that. \"I see,\" he said, looking at the ground. Actually, I felt sorry
for him. He was a nice guy, basically --- but he wasn't Olga.

I got back into the Hudson, closed the door and said through the open
window as I started the engine: \"You shouldn\'t have expectations,
Jacky, and you wouldn\'t be disappointed.\" I didn't mean it
sarcastically, although it came out that way.

I closed the window against the cold drizzle, turned on the windshield
wipers and gunned the Hudson Hornet towards San Francisco where I, at
least, still had expectations. However, you\'ll be disappointed (or
relieved, she could have been a spy) that I never found Olga, not even
the bar. Nevertheless, it was true!

I should explain something about all that. First, I didn\'t tell Jacky
the whole story, just the basics. That was enough for him. You may
wonder how I could remember it in such detail when it was so long ago.
Well, perhaps the details aren\'t that exact, especially the dialogues.
But basically, essentially, it\'s true.

Once, probably before the Olga incident, I was in a bar in downtown
Monterey on a weekday evening, so there were no soldiers from Fort Ord,
who could only get weekend passes. I had already been browsing, drinking
cheap beer, so I was feeling no pain, as they say. The bar wasn\'t in
the same class as the Gilded Cage. Actually, It was a dump. There were
only a few people in it, three or four young men, obviously townies, and
a pretty girl. I gave her the eye, she gave it back accompanied by a
silent smile. This went on until one of the townies noticed my interest.
I must explain that townies hated soldiers, don\'t know why, maybe
because soldiers were the horniest toads around and openly chased their
girls. The soldiers from Fort Ord, knew this, and usually hunted in
pairs or threes.

The girl slid off her bar stool and came in my direction. She walked the
length of the bar but passed me and stood before the cigarette machine
behind me. She put some coins in and, while it noisily digested them,
whispered to me: "You better get outta here --- quick." Clearly a
warning. And she sashayed back down the bar. It was almost three
o\'clock in the morning when the bar would close and if I waited, we\'d
all be leaving together and the way those townies were glaring at me I
didn\'t think it was a good idea. So, I picked up my change from the bar
and casually opened and walked out the door. As I was closing the door
after me, I saw the three guys get off their stools and head toward the
exit. The street was deserted, so I took off running and the three guys
took off after me. I crossed the street and turned the corner toward
where my car was parked. It was about twenty yards down the street, and
I knew I\'d never be able to reach it, open the locked door with my key,
get in and start the motor, which was real lazy starting, and drive off
before they caught me.

I was passing an alleyway and turned into it hoping to be able to hide.
But it turned out to be a courtyard with no exit. A perfect place to get
beaten up. To the right I noticed a line of three of four garbage cans
near but not quite against the wall. I slipped behind them and sat down
on the ground. Luckily it was very dark. I heard a voice from the street
yell, "Hey, he might have gone in here." One or more came into the
courtyard, I could hear them breathing out of breath, I stopped
breathing. "Nah, he ain\'t here, musta run like hell." "Yeah, let\'s go
back before the joint closes and get another beer." They left. I stayed
put just in case. The next thing I knew the sun was reflecting off the
garbage cans, I had fallen asleep, it was morning. I stood up aching all
over and walked out of the alley. My car --- that old Hudson Hornet ---
was parked close. I got in and drove back up to the Presidium and fell
into bed. It was Sunday.

The two guys I was most friendly with in my barracks were my next-door
cubicle neighbors, so to speak: Fred and Junior, students of Korean.
Junior was Fred\'s Sancho Panza, I was merely a neighbor. Fred was from
Reno, Nevada, where not only gambling was legal, but also prostitution.
Fred invited us to drive up to Reno --- in my car --- one weekend
essentially to visit a bordello, a.k.a whorehouse. It was a dump on the
outskirts of Reno. The madam welcomed us. We paid in advance, I forget
how much, but it was certainly cheap. She told us to sit down and had a
very short (3) parade of "girls" march in for selection. It was like an
animal fair. Fred, experienced as he was, quickly selected the prettiest
(or least homely) of the three and was led by her into one of the
interior rooms; same with Junior, who selected the second least homely,
thereby leaving me with the least pretty or most homely. She led me into
a small room containing a chair and a bed. She sat on the bed and told
me with a sergeant-like authority, to stand in front of her and lower my
pants and underpants. I obeyed and she squeezed my limp penis to test
for venereal disease. After I passed the test, she said: "How dya want
it?" I was shocked and disgusted at how demeaning the process was ---
more to her than to me. "I don\'t," I said and left the room. Back in
the reception area I sat down to wait for Fred and Junior. The Madam
didn\'t seem surprised to see me back so soon and said nothing.

Fred directed us to a hotel cum gambling den where we got cheap but
decent rooms paid for by Fred. This was his invitation. The hotels in
Reno figured correctly that they would earn much more from the guests\'
gambling losses. But this trip to Reno is not the reason for mentioning
Fred and Junior here. The reason is that I had an inexplicably strong
desire to visit Mexico. It was possible to drive to San Francisco or
Reno on a Friday afternoon and return on Sunday, but Mexico was too far.
Therefore, I insisted that we three --- Fred. Junior and I --- meet on
the steps of the City Hall of Mexico City on New Years Day when we would
surely no longer be in the army and would be able to afford such a
rendezvous. I made them swear that they would. Of course, we all forgot
about it once leaving Monterey behind us. I mention it now because it
seems related to the many years I subsequently spent in Argentina and my
relation to other South American countries as well as to Spain. As
though I subconsciously knew it all in advance.

To be continued...

[Episode Four](https://southerncrossreview.org/161/exiles-end-4.html)

*Exile's End: a Memoir* is available in paperback and ebook from [Barnes
&
Noble](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/exiles-end-frank-thomas-smith/1145558806?ean=9781948302616)
and
[Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Exiles-End-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/1948302616).
As a pdf file free of charge send an email to
<fts@southerncrossreview.org> with "Exile's End" as subject.
