# Chinese Restaurant

## by Frank Thomas Smith
                                                                      
I was in a rickety bus that had just reached the top of a mountain    
pass and started down the other side. I looked out the window and saw 
the floor of a valley far below. It was partly cultivated, the rest   
being forest-land and small villages bathed in soft twilight hues.    
The woman I loved occupied the seat next to me. She leaned against my 
shoulder to look out the window.                                      
                                                                      
\"Is that it?\" I asked her.                                          
                                                                      
\"Yes, that\'s Traslasierra\".                                        
                                                                      
I continued to smell the perfume of her hair after waking, but        
couldn\'t see her face clearly. Was she someone from my past, I asked 
myself, or was she still to come?                                     
                                                                      
Three weeks later I was having lunch with my cousin Barbara in a      
restaurant in Chinatown, New York City, one of those self-service     
places with good food and low prices and lots of customers. The       
tables were close together in order to jam as many people in as       
possible. Barbara lives Upstate and we see each other once in a blue  
moon, so she was filling me in on her life since we\'d last met.      
She\'s a philosophy professor turned artist and had recently had an   
exhibition in a small-town gallery that she was excited about.        
Suddenly she broke off.                                               
                                                                      
\"And what about you, Frank?\" she said, digging into her chop suey,  
which was getting cold. \"Here I am blabbing away about myself        
without giving you a chance to say anything. I\'m awful that way.\"   
                                                                      
Nothing much had happened to me since we last saw each other, nothing 
I wanted to talk about anyway. I was searching for a topic when the   
dream occurred to me. I told her about it and mentioned what a deep   
impression it had made on me.                                         
                                                                      
\"I don\'t see why you\'re so impressed by *that* dream,\" Barbara    
said when I finished. \"You should hear some of mine \-- like sexy,   
man.\"                                                                
                                                                      
\"Did you say Traslasierra?\" a woman at the next table asked.        
                                                                      
We both turned and looked at her in surprise.                         
                                                                      
\"Yes, I did.\" She stared at me with deep black eyes, then looked    
away. She seemed embarrassed. \"It means something like \'beyond the  
mountains\' in Spanish, but I don\'t know what meaning it had in my   
dream or where it is, if anywhere,\" I said, wanting her to respond.  
                                                                      
\"I think I know where it is,\" she said. \"There\'s a Traslasierra   
in\--\" She broke off and looked down at her food.                    
                                                                      
\"Yes, where?\"                                                       
                                                                      
\"You know,\" she said, looking up at me, \"what\'s really            
interesting is that I had the same dream. I know it sounds weird,     
but\...\"                                                             
                                                                      
\"No, I know you now - you were in my dream!\" I blurted out so       
loudly that the people at the adjoining tables who weren\'t shouting  
to make themselves heard turned and looked at me.                     
                                                                      
\"Oh dear!\" Barbara intervened. \"Listen dreamer, why don\'t you     
come on over and join us so we can stop shouting.\"                   
                                                                      
The woman left her half-eaten meal and pulled her chair over to our   
table. \"I recognize you too, from the dream,\" she smiled.           
                                                                      
\"Now wait a minute you two,\" Barbara said. \"If you don\'t mind my  
saying so, it sounds to me like you\'re still dreaming.\"             
                                                                      
\"What do you mean?\" I said, annoyed.                                
                                                                      
\"Let\'s look at all this logically,\" she pronounced in her          
professorial style. \"You had a dream in which there was another      
person, a woman you didn\'t know. Right, Frank? You never saw her     
before?\"                                                             
                                                                      
\"Yeah, that\'s right.\"                                              
                                                                      
\"So we\'re having lunch here, you tell me about your dream, and our  
next-door neighbor\...What did you say your name was, honey?\"        
                                                                      
\"I didn\'t say, but it\'s Clara.\"                                   
                                                                      
\"And our next-table neighbor, Clara, listens to you telling me about 
the dream and\...\"                                                   
                                                                      
\"I overheard it,\" Clara interrupted. \"I wasn\'t *listening* to     
him.\"                                                                
                                                                      
\"Whatever.\" Barbara was being rude. She\'s really very nice but she 
can be rude, especially when she\'s on an analytical kick.            
                                                                      
\"Anyway, she - you, Clara - suddenly jump up and say that you were   
the woman in the dream.\"                                             
                                                                      
\"I didn\'t jump up,\" Clara retorted, \"and I didn\'t say I was the  
woman in his dream.\"                                                 
                                                                      
\"What the hell *did* you say then?\"                                 
                                                                      
\"I said I had the same dream.\"                                      
                                                                      
\"So who were you, the bus driver?\"                                  
                                                                      
\"No, I was me and Frank was in *my* dream.\" She smiled at me as if  
to show that she didn\'t hold me responsible for my cousin\'s         
discourtesy.                                                          
                                                                      
\"What was to prevent you from claiming that you were in the dream    
when you werenï¿½t?\"                                                 
                                                                      
\"Why would I want to do that?\"                                      
                                                                      
\"Or you imagined it\", Barbara persisted. \"I mean really, folks,    
this is too much coincidence to accept.\"                             
                                                                      
\"And I imagined it too?\" I said.                                    
                                                                      
\"Power of suggestion, Frankie boy. Ever hear of it?\"                
                                                                      
\"Now wait a minute,\" Clara said. \"What did you say your name was,  
honey?\"                                                              
                                                                      
Barbara smiled at the dig in spite of herself and went along. \"I     
didn\'t say, but it\'s Barbara.\"                                     
                                                                      
\"OK, Barbara, just listen.\" She turned to me. \"Frank, did you tell 
Barbara the whole dream?\"                                            
                                                                      
\"As far as I can remember, yes.\"                                    
                                                                      
\"Do you remember a strange noise just before we reached the top of   
the mountain?\"                                                       
                                                                      
\"Oh, sure, Iï¿½d forgotten about that. The bus sort of rattled and   
made a noise and you asked what\'s that and I shrugged and said       
probably\...\"                                                        
                                                                      
\"Wait, I\'ll tell you what you said,\" she interrupted. \"But first  
whisper it to Barbara.\"                                              
                                                                      
\"That won\'t be necessary,\" I said. \"I believe you.\"              
                                                                      
\"I know, but I want to convince your skeptical companion.\"          
                                                                      
\"Cousin,\" Barbara corrected her. \"Write it, so she can\'t hear.\"  
                                                                      
\"For God\'s sake, Barbara.\" I was really exasperated with her by    
then.                                                                 
                                                                      
\"No, go ahead, Frank,\" Clara insisted. \"Write it.\" She turned her 
head away from us.                                                    
                                                                      
I scribbled a few words on a paper napkin and showed it to Barbara,   
who nodded. Clara turned back to us and said, confidently, \"It\'s    
probably the ancient transmission in this rattletrap.\" She looked at 
Barbara with a triumphant smile.                                      
                                                                      
Barbara frowned, and looked from Clara to me and back at Clara. \"I   
give up,\" she said. \"I absolutely give up. This is the godamn       
craziest thing I ever heard. But I have to believe you two nuts now,  
don\'t I?\" She leaned across the table and kissed Clara on the       
cheek. \"Sorry, Hon..Clara. I\'m just very suspicious by nature.      
Isn\'t it awful?\"                                                    
                                                                      
\"Don\'t worry about it, Barbara,\" Clara said. \"I\'d have been      
skeptical in your shoes too. But I wanted to ask you, Frank, how you  
felt when you woke up.\"                                              
                                                                      
\"How I felt?\"                                                       
                                                                      
\"Yes. Were you afraid?\"                                             
                                                                      
\"Why no, not at all, I was only surprised at how real the dream had  
seemed and how beautiful the valley below us looked. In fact I felt   
pretty damn good \-- happy in fact to\...well\...to be with you. Did  
you feel that way too?\"                                              
                                                                      
\"Yes, I did, but I was getting nervous toward the end of the dream   
because the noise and the rattling got worse and the bus began to go  
faster.\"                                                             
                                                                      
\"It did?\" I said, surprised. \"I don\'t remember that. Maybe I      
thought the noise was my alarm clock.\"                               
                                                                      
\"Or you woke up earlier than I did.\"                                
                                                                      
Clara was tall, almost as tall as me, with very short black hair      
combed like a boy\'s and strong, attractive features. She had on one  
of those long Indian cotton skirts, and a white blouse and sandals,   
the same clothes she wore in the dream.                               
                                                                      
\"You were going to say where this Traslasierra is,\" I reminded her. 
                                                                      
\"Yes. There\'s a Traslasierra in Argentina, where I originally came  
from, but there might be others in South America or even in Spain.\"  
                                                                      
\"Couldn\'t you recognize it in the dream?\" Barbara asked her.       
                                                                      
\"No. You see I left Argentina as a child. I remember having visited  
the Traslasierra once with my parents, but I don\'t remember that     
view from the bus. We might have taken a different road.\"            
                                                                      
\"Well, I must say that I am astonished,\" Barbara exclaimed. \"The   
shared dream and meeting here. Those things just don\'t happen. it\'s 
like\...I don\'t know what it\'s like.\"                              
                                                                      
\"It\'s like we were destined to meet,\" Clara said.                  
                                                                      
\"I guess everyone who meets another person is destined to meet them, 
but this is different,\" I said. \"It\'s like fate is saying, Hey,    
look you two, you\'ve found each other for a purpose. Now find out    
what it is.\"                                                         
                                                                      
We all three looked at each other, waiting. We must have had the same 
idea because it was so obvious, but were waiting for one of the       
others to say it. \"Not my turn,\" I finally said, and we laughed.    
                                                                      
\"It looks like I have to be the catalyst,\" Barbara said. \"Or       
continue being it because what else am I doing here anyway? Look, you 
two\...ah, you married or something, Clara?\"                         
                                                                      
\"Or something,\" Clara said.                                         
                                                                      
\"Engaged?\"                                                          
                                                                      
\"Live-in.\"                                                          
                                                                      
Well, do you think your roomy would object to you taking a long trip  
together with my sexy cousin here?\"                                  
                                                                      
\"Definitely, but I can handle it.\"                                  
                                                                      
\"Where to, Barbara?\" I asked innocently.                            
                                                                      
\"Tras-la-la, of course, stupid.\"                                    
                                                                      
\"What about you, Frank? Any ties?\" Clara asked me.                  
                                                                      
\"None that I can\'t handle.\"                                        
                                                                      
Barbara laughed. \"He means none he wouldn\'t love to untangle.\"     
                                                                      
\"Oh? Like what?\" Clara asked, looking at me.                        
                                                                      
\"Like an ex-wife who\'s trying to be his surrogate mother,\" Barbara 
answered for me, exaggerating as usual.                               
                                                                      
The flight with Argentine Airlines was uneventful except for the poor 
service and cramped quarters. But it was cheap, considering that they 
threw in the Buenos Aires-Córdoba domestic portion for nothing. After 
arriving at the international airport it took us two hours to cross   
Buenos Aires by bus to the city airport in order to catch the         
one-hour flight to Córdoba, capital of the province of the same name. 
By then we were exhausted after traveling over sixteen hours, so we   
decided to spend the night in Córdoba, which was hotter than Buenos   
Aires, and that means *hot*. It was January, mid-summer in the        
Southern Hemisphere.                                                  
                                                                      
\"What\'s that mean?\" I asked Clara the next morning, pointing to    
the name of the bus company whose tickets we bought to the town of    
Nono.                                                                 
                                                                      
\"*El Petizo*? The Little One, something like that. The buses are     
pretty miniature.\"                                                   
                                                                      
\"How about The Runt?\"                                               
                                                                      
\"Perfect,\" she laughed.                                             
                                                                      
\"And where\'s Nono? Sounds pretty negative to me.\"                  
                                                                      
\"Not at all. It\'s a town in the Traslasierra and the name comes     
from a mountain shaped like a woman\'s breasts. That\'s what it means 
in the local Indian language.\"                                       
                                                                      
\"Does anyone still speak it?\"                                       
                                                                      
\"I doubt it, although there may be some old people around who do. We 
name towns and mountains in it and think we\'re being honorable, but  
that\'s about it.\"                                                   
                                                                      
\"Why are we going there?\"                                           
                                                                      
\"Traslasierra is an area running north-south for about a hundred     
kilometers,\" Clara explained, \"and includes Nono. I went there with 
my parents, so I remember it a little, and we have to go somewhere.\" 
                                                                      
\"Maybe we should rent a car,\" I suggested.                          
                                                                      
\"But then we wouldn\'t cross the Sierra in a bus like in the         
dream.\"                                                              
                                                                      
I felt pretty stupid. \"Good point. How about on the other side?\"    
                                                                      
\"There won\'t be any place to rent cars on the other side,\" she     
said, smiling at me as she might at a child asking for ice cream in   
the desert.                                                           
                                                                      
El Petizo was really a runt of a bus. Painted brightly inside and     
out, it looked fine with its portrait of Eva Peron wreathed in        
artificial flowers placed over and in front of the driver\'s head,    
but its makers must have forgotten to install shock absorbers. We     
left the city of Córdoba, entered the town of Villa Carlos Paz after  
a short drive, passed through it and started up the mountain road to  
cross the *Altas Cumbres*, or high peaks, on the other side of which  
was Traslasierra. El Petizo hardly ever left first gear. Clara and I  
waited uneasily for the moment when our dream would become reality.   
                                                                      
Two hours later, as El Petizo strained up over the summit, the driver 
shifted into second gear and we started down the other side. I looked 
out the window at the floor of the valley far below. It was partly    
cultivated, the rest being forest-land and small villages bathed in   
soft twilight hues. Clara offered me some grapes and leaned against   
my shoulder to look out the window. I smelled the perfume of her      
hair.                                                                 
                                                                      
\"Is that it?\" I ask her.                                            
                                                                      
\"Yes, that\'s Traslasierra.\"                                        
                                                                      
We were going too fast, I felt, for the sharp curves the bus had to   
negotiate. It began to rattle and shake and a whining noise came from 
somewhere deep in its entrails.                                       
                                                                      
\"What\'s that noise?\" Clara asked.                                  
                                                                      
\"It\'s probably the ancient transmission in this rattletrap.\"       
                                                                      
Suddenly the noise increased to the level of a jet engine whine, then 
ceased completely and the bus careened down the road out of control.  
This wasn\'t in my dream. I looked at the driver\'s back and saw him  
frantically pressing the brake pedal to the floor without effect. We  
were coming to a sharp curve which we would never be able to clear at 
this speed. The driver geared down to first but it wasn\'t enough. A  
woman screamed. Clara grabbed my hand as we plowed into the aluminum  
guardrail and plunged over the side.                                  
                                                                      
We rose from the smoldering wreckage together with the other          
passengers. Clara and I stood to one side, still holding hands.       
\"Well,\" I said, \"if I had to go, I\'m glad it was with you,        
Clara.\"                                                              
                                                                      
\"Oh, it had to be with me.\"                                         
                                                                      
\"What do you mean?\"                                                 
                                                                      
\"You were destined to die now and here with me, but you were         
reluctant to get the message.\"                                       
                                                                      
\"What message?\"                                                     
                                                                      
\"My message, darling. Don\'t you know who I am yet?\"                
                                                                      
I had been trying to spot our bodies inside the bus. Now I turned and 
looked at her. She was no longer Clara of the Chinese restaurant,     
but\--.                                                               
                                                                      
\"Mireya!\" I exclaimed. \"You, here? But how\--?\"                   
                                                                      
\"It\'s really simple. You should have been transferred to Argentina  
by the airline company you worked for, but you fell in love with that 
dimwitted American blonde, who couldn\'t bear to leave the States.    
You were fucking up our destiny, darling.\"                           
                                                                      
\"Mireya! You never used to use language like that.\"                 
                                                                      
\"Gotta keep up with the times, Federico.\" She laughed her           
infectious laugh and I had to laugh with her. Mireya and Federico,    
ill-fated lovers in Argentina, eighteenth century, the revolution     
against Spain\...it was all coming back.                              
                                                                      
\"Anyway, when you didn\'t come to Argentina, where we would have met 
and carried on our karmic journey as Frank and Clara, I had to go     
after you.\"                                                          
                                                                      
\"And the dream?\" I was still confused. Mireya was always a quicker  
thinker than me.                                                      
                                                                      
\"I don\'t know who arranged thatï¿½but it worked.\"                  
                                                                      
\"But how did you know where I was and all the rest of it? And why    
did you go to the Chinese restaurant that day?\"                      
                                                                      
\"I didn\'t know where you were, and I went to the Chinese restaurant 
because I was hungry. Didn\'t you?\"                                  
