# Nuclear Armageddon Games in Ukraine

![](einstein-atom.jpg){class="a"}

## by Joshua Frank

In 1946, Albert Einstein shot off a telegram to several hundred American
leaders and politicians warning that the "unleashed power of the atom
has changed everything save our modes of thinking and we thus drift
toward unparalleled catastrophe." Einstein's forecast remains prescient.
Nuclear calamity still knocks.

Even prior to Vladimir Putin's bloody invasion of Ukraine, the threat of
a nuclear confrontation between NATO and Russia was intensifying. After
all, in August 2019, President Donald Trump formally withdrew the U.S.
from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, long heralded as a
pillar of arms control between the two superpowers.

[]{#anchor}"Russia is solely responsible for the treaty's
demise," [**declared**](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-49198565) Secretary
of State Mike Pompeo following the announcement. "With the full support
of our NATO allies, the United States has determined Russia to be in
material breach of the treaty and has subsequently suspended our
obligations under the treaty." No evidence of that breach was offered,
but in Trump World, no evidence was needed.

Then, on February 21st of this year, following the Biden
administration's [**claims**](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/31/us/politics/us-russia-nuclear-treat.html) that
Russia was no longer abiding by its obligations under the New START
treaty, the last remaining nuclear arms accord between the two nations,
Putin [**announced**](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/21/world/europe/putin-new-start-treaty.html) that
he would end his country's participation.

In the year since Russia's initial assault on Ukraine, the danger of
nuclear war has only inched ever closer. While President Biden's White
House [**raised
doubts**](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/10/12/biden-says-he-doesnt-think-putin-will-use-nuclear-weapons-in-ukraine-war.html) that
Putin would indeed use any of Russia's tactical nuclear weapons in
Ukraine, the *Bulletin of Atomic Scientists* ominously reset its
Doomsday Clock at [**90 seconds to
midnight**](https://thebulletin.org/doomsday-clock/current-time/), the
closest since its creation in 1947. Those scientific experts weren't
buying what the Biden administration was selling.

"As Russia's war on Ukraine continues, the last remaining nuclear
weapons treaty between Russia and the United States... stands in
jeopardy," [**read**](https://thebulletin.org/doomsday-clock/current-time/) a
January 2023 press release from the *Bulletin* before Putin backed out
of the agreement. "Unless the two parties resume negotiations and find a
basis for further reductions, the treaty will expire in February 2026.
This would eliminate mutual inspections, deepen mistrust, spur a nuclear
arms race, and heighten the possibility of a nuclear exchange."

Of course, they were correct and, in mid-February, the Norwegian
government claimed Russia had already deployed ships armed with tactical
nukes in the Baltic Sea for the first time in more than 30 years.
"Tactical nuclear weapons are a particularly serious threat in several
operational scenarios in which NATO countries may be
involved," [**claimed**](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/russia-norway-tactical-nuclear-weapons-b2282558.html) the
report. "The ongoing tensions between Russia and the West mean that
Russia will continue to pose the greatest nuclear threat to NATO, and
therefore to Norway."

For its part, in October 2022, NATO ran its own nuclear bombing drills,
designated "[**Steadfast
Noon**](https://www.reuters.com/world/russian-nuclear-strike-would-almost-certainly-draw-physical-response-nato-2022-10-12/),"
with fighter jets in Europe's skies involved in "war games" (minus live
weaponry). "It's an exercise to ensure that our nuclear deterrent
remains safe, secure, and effective," claimed NATO chief Jens
Stoltenberg, but it almost seemed as if NATO was taunting Putin to cross
the line.

And yet, here's the true horror story lurking behind the war in Ukraine.
While a nuclear tit-for-tat between Russia and NATO --- an exchange that
could easily destroy much of Eastern Europe in no time at all --- is a
genuine, if frightening, prospect, it isn't the most imminent
radioactive peril facing the region.

**Averting a Meltdown**

By now, we all ought to be familiar with the worrisome Zaporizhzhia
nuclear complex (ZNPP), which sits right in the middle of the Russian
incursion into Ukraine. Assembled between 1980 and 1986, Zaporizhzhia is
Europe's largest nuclear-power complex, with six 950-megawatt reactors.
In February and March of last year, after a series of fierce battles,
which caused a fire to break out at a nearby training facility, the
Russians hijacked the embattled plant. Representatives of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) were later sent in to ensure
that the reactors weren't at immediate risk of meltdown and issued
a [**report
stating**](https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/22/09/ukraine-2ndsummaryreport_sept2022.pdf),
in part, that:

"...further escalation affecting the six-reactor plant could lead to a
severe nuclear accident with potentially grave radiological consequences
for human health and the environment in Ukraine and elsewhere and that
renewed shelling at or near the ZNPP was deeply troubling for nuclear
safety and security at the facility."

Since then, the fighting has only intensified. Russia kidnapped some of
the plant's Ukrainian employees, including its deputy director Valery
Martynyuk. In September 2022, due to ongoing shelling in the area,
Zaporizhzhia was taken offline and, after losing external power on
several occasions, has since been sporadically relying on old
diesel [**backup
generators**](https://www.world-nuclear-news.org/Articles/Zaporizhzhia-relying-on-diesel-generators-after-lo).
(Once disconnected from the electrical grid, backup power is crucial to
ensure the plant's reactors don't overheat, which could lead to a
full-blown radioactive meltdown.)

However, relying on risk-prone backup power is a fool's game, according
to electrical engineer Josh Karpoff. A member of [**Science for the
People**](https://scienceforthepeople.org/) who previously worked for
the New York State Office of General Services where he designed
electrical systems for buildings, including large standby generators,
Karpoff knows how these things work in a real-world setting. He assures
me that, although Zaporizhzhia is no longer getting much attention in
the general rush of Ukraine news, the possibility of a major disaster
there is ever more real. A backup generator, he explains, is about as
reliable as a '75 Winnebago.

"It's really not that hard to knock out these kinds of diesel
generators," Karpoff adds. "If your standby generator starts up but says
there's a leak in a high-pressure oil line fitting, it sprays heated,
aerosolized oil all over the hot motor, starting a fire. This happens to
diesel motors all the time. A similar diesel engine fire in a locomotive
was partly responsible for causing the [**Lac Megantic Rail
Disaster**](https://www.tsb.gc.ca/eng/rapports-reports/rail/2013/r13d0054/r13d0054.html) in
Quebec back in 2013."

Sadly enough, Karpoff is on target. Just remember how the backup
generators failed at the three nuclear reactors in Fukushima, Japan, in
2011. Many people believe that the 9.0 magnitude underwater earthquake
caused them to melt down, but that's not exactly the case.

It was, in fact, a horrific chain of worsening events. While the
earthquake itself didn't damage Fukushima's reactors, it cut the
facility off from the power grid, automatically switching the plant to
backup generators. So even though the fission reaction had stopped, heat
was still being produced by the radioactive material inside the reactor
cores. A continual water supply, relying on backup power, was needed to
keep those cores from melting down. Then, 30 minutes after that huge
quake, a tsunami struck, knocking out the plant's seawater pumps, which
subsequently caused the generators to go down.

"The myth of the tsunami is that the tsunami destroyed the
\[generators\] and had that not happened, everything would have been
fine," former nuclear engineer Arnie
Gunderson [**told**](https://www.democracynow.org/2012/3/12/nuclear_engineer_arnie_gundersen_fukushima_meltdown) Amy
Goodman on *Democracy Now!* "What really happened is that the tsunami
destroyed the \[sea\] pumps right along the ocean... Without that water,
the \[diesel generators\] will overheat, and without that water, it's
impossible to cool a nuclear core."

With the sea pumps out of commission, 12 of the plant's 13
generators [**ended up
**](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0272937)[**failing**](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0272937).
Unable to cool, the reactors began to melt, leading to three hydrogen
explosions that released radioactive material, carried disastrously
across the region and out to sea by prevailing winds, where much of it
will continue to [**float
around**](https://www.whoi.edu/oceanus/feature/fukushima-disaster-response/) and [**accumulate**](https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/health-environment/article/3166415/radioactive-rockfish-caught-near-fukushima-nuclear) for
decades.

At Zaporizhzhia, there are several scenarios that could lead to a
similar failure of the standby generators. They could be directly
shelled and catch fire or clog up or just run out of fuel. It's a dicey
situation, as the ongoing war edges Ukraine and the surrounding
countries toward the brink of a catastrophic nuclear crisis.

"I don't know for how long we are going to be lucky in avoiding a
nuclear
accident," [**said**](https://euobserver.com/ukraine/156639) Rafael
Grossi, director general of the IAEA in late January, calling it a
"bizarre situation: a Ukrainian facility in Russian-controlled
territory, managed by Russians, but operated by Ukrainians."

**Bad Things Will Follow**

Unfortunately, it's not just Zaporizhzhia we have to worry about. Though
not much attention has been given to them, there are, in
fact,[ ](https://citywatchla.com/index.php/cw/important-reads/23945-15-nuclear-reactors-in-the-midst-of-battle)[**14
other nuclear power
plants**](https://citywatchla.com/index.php/cw/important-reads/23945-15-nuclear-reactors-in-the-midst-of-battle) in
the war zone and Russia has also seized the ruined Chernobyl plant,
where there is still significant hot radioactive waste that must
be [**kept
cool**](https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-business-health-europe-accidents-edcd5bc0e6bde3cbf6d7300bebc9343f).

Kate Brown, author
of *Plutopia*, [**told**](https://magazine.scienceforthepeople.org/online/interview-kate-brown-ukraine/) Science
for the People last April:

"Russians are apparently using these two captured nuclear installations
like kings on a chessboard. They hold Chernobyl and the Zaporizhzhia
nuclear power reactor plants, and they are stockpiling weapons and
soldiers there as safe havens. This is a new military tactic we haven't
seen before, where you use the vulnerability of these installations, as
a defensive tactic. The Russians apparently figured that the Ukrainians
wouldn't shoot. The Russians noticed that when they came to the
Chernobyl zone, the Ukrainian guard of the Chernobyl plant stood down
because they didn't want missiles fired at these vulnerable
installations. There are twenty thousand spent nuclear fuel rods, more
than half of them in basins at that plant. It's a precarious situation.
This is a new scenario for us."

Of course, the hazards facing Zaporizhzhia and Chernobyl would be
mitigated if Putin removed his forces tomorrow, but there's little
possibility of that happening. It's worth noting as well that Ukraine is
not the only place where, in the future, such a scenario could play out.
Taiwan, at the center of a potential military conflict between the U.S.
and China, has several nuclear power plants. Iran operates a nuclear
facility. Pakistan has six reactors at two different sites. Saudi Arabia
is building a new facility. The list only goes on and on.

Even more regrettably, Russia has raised the nuclear stakes in a new
way, setting a distressing precedent with its illegal occupation of
Zaporizhzhia and Chernobyl, turning them into tools of war. No other
power-generating source operating in a war zone, even the worst of the
fossil-fuel users, poses such a potentially serious and immediate threat
to life as we know it on this planet.

And while hitting those Ukrainian reactors themselves is one recipe for
utter disaster, there are other potentially horrific "peaceful" nuclear
possibilities as well. What about a deliberate attack on nuclear-waste
facilities or those unstable backup generators? You wouldn't even have
to strike the reactors directly to cause a disaster. Simply take out the
power-grid supply lines, hit the generators, and terrible things will
follow. With nuclear power, even the purportedly "peaceful" type, the
potential for catastrophe is obvious.

**The Greatest of Evils**

In my new book [***Atomic Days: The Untold Story of the Most Toxic Place
in
America***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598283/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
I probe the horrors of the Hanford site in Washington state, one of the
locations chosen to develop the first nuclear weapons for the covert
Manhattan Project during World War II. For more than 40 years, that
facility churned out most of the plutonium used in the vast American
arsenal of atomic weapons.

Now, however, Hanford is a radioactive wasteland, as well as the largest
and most expensive environmental clean-up project in history. To say
that it's a boondoggle would be an understatement. Hanford has 177
underground tanks loaded with 56 million gallons of steaming radioactive
gunk. Two of those tanks are currently leaking, their waste making its
way toward groundwater supplies that could eventually reach the Columbia
River. High-level whistleblowers I interviewed who worked at Hanford
told me they feared that a hydrogen build-up in one of those tanks, if
ignited, could lead to a Chernobyl-like event here in the United States,
resulting in a tragedy unlike anything this country has ever
experienced.

All of this makes me fear that those old Hanford tanks could someday be
possible targets for an attack. Sabotage or a missile strike on them
could cause a major release of radioactive material from coast to coast.
The economy would crash. Major cities would become unlivable. And
there's precedent for this: in 1957, a
massive [**explosion**](https://www.counterpunch.org/2022/11/04/russias-forgotten-nuclear-accident/) occurred
at Mayak, Hanford's Cold War sister facility in the then-Soviet Union
that manufactured plutonium for nukes. Largely unknown, it was the
second biggest peacetime radioactive disaster ever, only "bested" by the
Chernobyl accident. In Mayak's case, a faulty cooling system gave out
and the waste in one of the facility's tanks overheated, causing a
radioactive blast equivalent to the force of 70 tons of
TNT, [**contaminating 20,000 square
miles**](https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-mayak-villagers-living-in-shadow-nuclear-tragedy/28921944.html).
Countless people died and [**whole
villages**](https://www.latimes.com/world/europe/la-fg-russia-mayak-20180216-story.html) were
forever vacated.

All of this is to say that nuclear waste, whether on a battlefield or
not, is an inherently nasty business. Nuclear facilities around the
world, containing less waste than the underground silos at Hanford, have
already shown us
their [**vulnerabilities**](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20022419/).
Last August, in fact, the Russians reported that containers housing
spent fuel waste at Zaporizhzhia were shelled by Ukrainian forces. "One
of the guided shells hit the ground ten meters from them (containers
with nuclear waste...). Others fell down slightly further --- 50 and 200
meters," [**alleged**](https://tass.com/politics/1494501) Vladimir
Rogov, a Russian-appointed official there. "As the storage area is open,
a shell or a rocket may unseal containers and kilograms, or even
hundreds of kilograms of nuclear waste will be emitted into the
environment and contaminate it. To put it simply, it will be a 'dirty
bomb.'"

Ukraine, in
turn, [**blamed**](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-62432873) Russia
for the strike, but regardless of which side was at fault, after
Chernobyl (which some researchers believe affected upwards of [**1.8
million
people**](https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20190725-will-we-ever-know-chernobyls-true-death-toll))
both the Ukrainians and the Russians understand the grave risks of
atomically-charged explosions. This is undoubtedly why the Russians are
apparently [**constructing**](https://www.ans.org/news/article-4595/russia-building-protection-over-zaporizhzhia-spent-fuel-tanks-according-to-russian-news-source/) protective
coverings over Zaporizhzhia's waste storage tanks. An incident at the
plant releasing radioactive particles would damage not just Ukraine but
Russia, too.

As former *New York Times* correspondent Chris Hedges so [**aptly put
it**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1644212935/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
war is the greatest of evils and such evils rise exponentially with the
prospect of a nuclear apocalypse. Worse yet, a radioactive Armageddon
doesn't have to come from the actual detonation of nuclear bombs. It can
take many forms. The atom, as Einstein warned us, has certainly changed
everything.

Copyright 2023 Joshua Frank

*Follow TomDispatch on *[**Twitter**](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch) *and
join us on* [**Facebook**](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch).
*Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel,* [**Songlands**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20) (*the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel* [**Every Body Has a Story**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), *and
Tom Engelhardt's* [**A Nation Unmade by War**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*as well as Alfred McCoy's* [**In the Shadows of the American Century: The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global Power**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), *John
Dower's* [**The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World War II**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), *and
Ann Jones's* [**They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from America's Wars: The Untold Story**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

[**Joshua Frank**](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/joshuafrank/) , a [**TomDispatch regular**](https://tomdispatch.com/nuclear-fusion-wont-save-the-climate/),
is an award-winning California-based journalist and co-editor
of [***CounterPunch***](https://www.counterpunch.org/). He is the author
of the new book [***Atomic Days: The Untold Story of the Most Toxic
Place in
America***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598283/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[ ](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598283/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)(Haymarket
Books).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](tomdispatch,com)

