# The Gospel According to Mary Magdalene

![](magdalene.jpg){class="a"}

#### Chapter 4
*(Pages 1 to 6 of the manuscript, containing chapters 1 - 3, are
lost.  The extant text starts on page 7\...)*

. . . Will matter then be destroyed or not?

The Savior said, All nature, all formations, all creatures exist
in and with one another, and they will be resolved again into
their own roots. For the nature of matter is resolved into the
roots of its own nature alone. He who has ears to hear, let him
hear.

Peter said to him, Since you have explained everything to us, tell
us this also: What is the sin of the world?

The Savior said There is no sin, but it is you who make sin when
you do the things that are like the nature of adultery, which is
called sin. That is why the Good came into your midst, to the
essence of every nature in order to restore it to its root.

Then He continued and said, That is why you become sick and die,
for you are deprived of the one who can heal you. He who has a
mind to understand, let him understand.

Matter gave birth to a passion that has no equal, which proceeded
from something contrary to nature. Then there arises a disturbance
in its whole body.

That is why I said to you, Be of good courage, and if you are
discouraged be encouraged in the presence of the different forms
of nature. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.

When the Blessed One had said this, He greeted them all,saying,
Peace be with you. Receive my peace unto yourselves. Beware that
no one lead you astray saying Lo here or lo there! For the Son of
Man is within you. Follow Him! Those who seek Him will find Him.
Go then and preach the gospel of the Kingdom. Do not lay down any
rules beyond what I appointed you, and do not give a law like the
lawgiver lest you be constrained by it.

When He said this He departed.

#### Chapter 5

But they were grieved. They wept greatly, saying, How shall we go
to the Gentiles and preach the gospel of the Kingdom of the Son of
Man? If they did not spare Him, how will they spare us?

Then Mary stood up, greeted them all, and said to her brethren, Do
not weep and do not grieve nor be irresolute, for His grace will
be entirely with you and will protect you. But rather, let us
praise His greatness, for He has prepared us and made us into
human beings.

When Mary said this, she turned their hearts to the Good, and they
began to discuss the words of the Savior.

Peter said to Mary, Sister we know that the Savior loved you more
than the rest of woman. Tell us the words of the Savior which you
remember, which you know, but we do not, nor have we heard them.

Mary answered and said, What is hidden from you I will proclaim to
you.

And she began to speak to them these words: I, she said, I saw the
Lord in a vision and I said to Him, Lord I saw you today in a
vision. He answered and said to me, Blessed are you that you did
not waver at the sight of Me. For where the mind is there is the
treasure.

I said to Him, Lord, how does he who sees the vision see it,
through the soul or through the spirit?

The Savior answered and said, He does not see through the soul nor
through the spirit, but the mind that is between the two that is
what sees the vision and it is \[\...\]

*(pages 11 - 14 are missing from the manuscript)*

#### Chapter 8:

. . . it.

And desire said, I did not see you descending, but now I see you
ascending. Why do you lie since you belong to me?

The soul answered and said, I saw you. You did not see me nor
recognize me. I served you as a garment and you did not know me.

When it said this, it (the soul) went away rejoicing greatly.

Again it came to the third power, which is called ignorance.

The power questioned the soul, saying, Where are you going? In
wickedness are you bound. But you are bound; do not judge!

And the soul said, Why do you judge me, although I have not
judged? I was bound, though I have not bound. I was not
recognized. But I have recognized that the All is being dissolved,
both the earthly things and the heavenly.

When the soul had overcome the third power, it went upwards and
saw the fourth power, which took seven forms.

The first form is darkness, the second desire, the third
ignorance, the fourth is the excitement of death, the fifth is the
kingdom of the flesh, the sixth is the foolish wisdom of flesh,
the seventh is the wrathful wisdom. These are the seven powers of
wrath.

They asked the soul, Whence do you come slayer of men, or where
are you going, conqueror of space?

The soul answered and said, What binds me has been slain, and what
turns me about has been overcome, and my desire has been ended,
and ignorance has died. In a aeon I was released from a world, and
in a type from a type, and from the fetter of oblivion which is
transient. From this time on will I attain to the rest of the
time, of the season, of the aeon, in silence.

#### Chapter 9

When Mary had said this, she fell silent, since it was to this
point that the Savior had spoken with her.

But Andrew answered and said to the brethren, Say what you wish to
say about what she has said. I at least do not believe that the
Savior said this. For certainly these teachings are strange ideas.

Peter answered and spoke concerning these same things. He
questioned them about the Savior: Did He really speak privately
with a woman and not openly to us? Are we to turn about and all
listen to her? Did He prefer her to us?

Then Mary wept and said to Peter, My brother Peter, what do you
think? Do you think that I have thought this up myself in my
heart, or that I am lying about the Savior?

Levi answered and said to Peter, Peter you have always been hot
tempered. Now I see you contending against the woman like the
adversaries. But if the Savior made her worthy, who are you indeed
to reject her? Surely the Savior knows her very well. That is why
He loved her more than us. Rather let us be ashamed and put on the
perfect Man, and separate as He commanded us and preach the
gospel, not laying down any other rule or other law beyond what
the Savior said.

And when they heard this they began to go forth to proclaim and to
preach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Papyrus Berolinensis 8502** was acquired by a German scholar,
Dr. Carl Reinhardt, in Cairo in 1896 (the codex is variably
referenced in scholarly writings as the \"Berlin Gnostic
Codex\", the \"Akhmim Codex\", PB 8502, and BG 8502).   It
contains Coptic editions of three very important Gnostic texts: 
the *Apocryphon of John*, the *Sophia of Jesus Christ*, and the
*Gospel of Mary*.  Despite the importance of the find, several
misfortunes (including two world wars) delayed its publication
until 1955. By then the Nag Hammadi collection had also been
recovered, and two of the texts in the PB 8502 codex \-- the
*Apocryphon of John*, and the *Sophia of Jesus Christ* \-- were
also found included there.  The PB 8502 versions of these two
texts were used to augment translations of the *Apocryphon of
John* and the *Sophia of Jesus Christ* as they now appear in the
[Nag Hammadi Library](http://www.gnosis.org/naghamm/nhl.html).

Importantly, the codex preserves the most complete surviving
copy of the *Gospel of Mary* (as the text is named in the
manuscript, though it is clear this named Mary is the person we
call *Mary of Magdala*. Two other small fragments of the Gospel
of Mary from separate Greek editions were later also unearthed
in archaelogical excavations at Oxyrhynchus in Northern Egypt. 
Fragments of the *Gospel of Thomas* were also found at this
ancient library site. Unfortunately, the extant manuscript of
the Gospel of Mary is missing pages 1 to 6 and pages 11 to 14
\-- pages that included sections of the text up to chapter 4,
and portions of chapter 5 to 8. 

The complete extant text of the *Gospel of Mary* is presented
above

