# William Shakespeare

![Lawrence Olivier as Hamlet](hamlet.jpg)  

## by Rudolf Steiner


Notes from a lecture given in Berlin on May 6, 1902, GA 52\
Original translator unknown. Revised by Frank Thomas Smith

  

> > *Friends who heard that notes existed of a lecture on
> > Shakespeare given by Dr. Steiner in 1902 at the Workmen's
> > School in Berlin expressed the wish to read these notes. They
> > were taken down by Johanna Mï¿½cke, who did not know
> > shorthand, so they do not claim to be complete. The 7 pages of
> > typescript may correspond to about 25 pages of the original
> > text of the lecture. But important points emerge even from
> > these incomplete notes.*
> > 
> > Marie Steiner

  

According to a remark by the famous writer [Georg
Brandes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georg_Brandes), we
should include Shakespeare in the German classics. And if we
consider the enormous influence Shakespeare has had on Goethe,
schiller and the development of German literature in general
since he was rediscovered in the middle of the eighteenth
century, especially through Lessing, we must agree with that
remark ï¿½ especially in view of the excellent translations of
his work by
[Schlegel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_Wilhelm_Schlegel)
and Tieck.ï¿½ï¿½

A legend has arisen about Shakespeare and whole libraries have
been written about each of his works. Academics have given
many interpretations of his plays, and finally a number of
writers have decided that an uneducated actor could not have
produced all the thoughts which they discovered in
Shakespeare's works, and they became addicted to the
hypothesis that not William Shakespeare, the actor of the
Globe Theatre, could have written the plays which bear his
name, but some other highly learned man, for example [ï¿½Lord
Francis Bacon of
Verulam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Bacon), who in
view of the low estimation of literary activity at that time,
borrowed the actor's name. These suppositions are based on the
fact that no manuscripts written by Shakespeareï¿½s hand have
ever been found; they are also based upon a notebook
discovered in a London library with single passages in it
which are supposed to correspond with certain passages in
Shakespeare's plays. But Shakespeare's own works bear witness
that he is their author. His plays reveal that they were
written by a man who had a thorough knowledge of the theatre
and the deepest understanding for theatrical effects.

That Shakespeare himself did not publish his plays was simply
in keeping with the general custom at his time. Not one of his
plays was printed during his lifetime. They were carefully
kept under wraps; people were to come to the theatre and see
the plays there, not read them at home. Prints which appeared
at that time were pirated editions, based on notes taken
during the performances, so that the texts did not completely
correspond to the original versions, but were full of errors
and mutilations.

These partial omissions and mistakes led certain researchers
to claim that Shakespeare's plays, as they were then
available, were not works of art of any special value and that
originally they must have existed in quite a different form.
One of these researchers is Eugen Reichel, who thinks that the
author of Shakespeare's plays was a man with a certain
definite worldview. But such opinions are contradicted by the
fact that the plays, in the form in which they now exist,
exercise such an extraordinary influence. We see this great
effect in plays that have undoubtedly been mutilated, for
example in *Macbeth*. The hold of Shakespeare's plays on his
audience was proved by a performance of ï¿½*Henry V* under the
direction of Neuman-Hofer at the inauguration of the Lessing
Theatre. It did not fail to produce a powerful impression in
spite of an extremely bad translation and poor acting.

Shakespeare's plays are above all character dramas. The great
interest which they arouse does not so much lie in the action,
as in the wonderful development of the individual characters.
The poet conjures up before us a human character and unfolds
his thoughts and feelings in the presentation of an individual
personality.

This artistic development, which culminated in Shakespeare,
was made possible by the preceding phase of cultural
development: the Renaissance. Shakespeare's character-dramas
could only arise as a result of the higher estimation of the
individual during the Renaissance. During the early middle
ages we find, even in Dante and in spite of his strong
personality, the basic expression of the Christian ideas of
that time. The Christian type of his time, not the individual
human personality, appeared in the foreground. This was the
general conception. The Christian principle had no interest in
the individual personality. But little by little a new
worldview aroused interest in the Individual human being. Only
gradually did a new interest in the individual arise by means
of the different viewpoint.

The fact that Shakespeare's fame spread so quickly proves that
he found an audience keenly interested in the theatre, that is
to say, with a certain understanding for the representation of
the personality as offered by Shakespeare. Shakespeare's chief
aim was to describe individual characters, ï¿½and he was far
from presenting to his audience an ethical or moral idea. For
example, the idea of tragic guilt, as found in Schiller's
dramas, who thought that he had to encumber his hero with it
in order to justify his downfall, does not exist in
Shakespeare's plays. He simply allows the events to take their
course consistently, uninfluenced by the idea of guilt and
atonement. It would be difficult to find a concept of guilt in
this sense in any of his plays.

Shakespeare also did not intend to present a certain idea, not
jealousy in *Othello* or ambition in *Macbeth*, no, simply the
definite characters of Othello, Macbeth, or Hamlet. Just
because he did not burden his characters with theories was he
able to create such great ones. He was thoroughly acquainted
with the stage, and this practical knowledge enabled him to
develop his action in such a way as to thrill an audience. In
the whole literature of the world there are no plays which are
so completely conceived from the standpoint of the actor. This
is a clear proof that Shakespeare, the *actor*, has the
merit of having written these plays.

Shakespeare was born in Stratford in 1564. His father was in
fairly good circumstances, so that his son was able to attend
the Latin grammar school in his hometown. There are many
legends about Shakespeare's youth. Some say that he was a
poacher and led an adventurous life. These things have been
adduced against his authorship, yet these very experiences
could only enrich his dramatic creation. Even the fact that in
spite of his good education he was not encumbered with higher
academic study, gave him the possibility to face things more
freely and in a far more unprejudiced way. The poet's
adventurous nature explains to some extent some of the
greatest qualities in his plays: the bold flight of his
fantasy, his sudden transformations in the action, his passion
and daring, all bear witness to a life full of movement and
color.

In 1585, when Shakespeare's financial conditions were no
longer in a flourishing state, he went to London. There he
began his theatrical career in the most menial way, by holding
the horses of the visitors while they were enjoying the
performance. He then became supervisor of a number of such
boys who had to hold the horses' reins, and was at last
admitted to the stage. In 1592 he played his first important
role.

His fame soon began to spread, both as an actor and as a
dramatist, and his conditions improved, so that in 1597 he
was able to buy a house in Stratford. After he became
part-owner of the Globe Theatre he was a wealthy man.

The plays written during Shakespeare's first period: *Love's
Labour Lost,* *As You Like It,* etc., do not differ so
greatly from the plays of his contemporaries, of ï¿½Marlowe
and others; their expressive power, their purity and
naturalness were moreover impaired by a certain artificial
note which was the fashion in those days. The great
character-plays, which were to establish his fame for all
time, followed: *Othello,* *Hamlet*, *Macbeth*, *King Lear*,
*Julius Caesar*.

Some of Shakespeare's biographers and commentators wish to
deduce from certain of his later plays troubled experiences
which embittered him. But in Shakespeare's case this is
difficult to establish, because his identity withdraws behind
his characters. They do not voice *his* thoughts, but they all
think and act in accordance with their own disposition and
character.

It is consequently useless to ask what Shakespeare's own
standpoint may have been on certain difficult questions. For
it is not Shakespeare, but Hamlet who broods over the problem
of "*to be, or not to be*", who recoils from his father's
ghost, just as Macbeth recoils from the witches. Whether
Shakespeare believed in ghosts and witches, whether he was a
churchgoer or a freethinker, is not the point at all:ï¿½ He
simply asked himself: how should a ghost or a witch appear on
the stage so as to produce a strong effect upon the audience?
The fact that this effect is undiminished today proves that
Shakespeare was able to answer this question.

We should not forget that the modern stage is not favourable
to the effect which Shakespeare's plays can produce. The
importance which is now attributed to props, costumes, the
frequent changes of scenery, etc. diminish the effect which is
to be produced by the characters in the plays ï¿½ for this
remains the chief thing. In Shakespeare's time when a change
of scenery was simply indicated by a notice-board, when a
table and a chair sufficed for the furniture of a royal
palace, the effect produced by the characters must have been
much greater than today.

Whereas in the modern theater so much depends on scenery,
props, etc., when the playwright usually gives a detailed
description of the scenery so that the effect of his plays may
be handicapped by bad staging, Shakespeare's plays leave a
strong impression, even when performed badly.

And when a times comes in which we again see the essential
more than is the case today, will the effect of
Shakespeareï¿½s art be ever greater: through the power of
characterization which remains alive and unequaled through the
centuries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thanks to the [Rudolf Steiner Archive.](http://rsarchive.org)

  

[![](narrow-door.jpg)  
Home](http://southerncrossreview.org)

 

 
