# Can the Military-Industrial Complex Be Tamed?

![](military-industrial-complex.png){class="alarge"}

### Cutting the Pentagon Budget in Half Would Finally Force the Generals to Think

## BY [**WILLIAM J. ASTORE**](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

My name is Bill Astore and I'm a card-carrying member of the
military-industrial complex (MIC).

Sure, I hung up my military uniform for the last time in 2005. [**Since
2007**](https://tomdispatch.com/astore-on-a-military-bemedaled-bothered-and-beleaguered/),
I've been writing articles for *TomDispatch* focused largely on
critiquing that same MIC and America's permanent war economy. I've
written against this
country's [**wasteful**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-america-s-mutant-military/) and [**unwise**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-grinding-down-the-u-s-army/) wars
in [**Iraq**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-america-s-hollow-foreign-legions/) and [**Afghanistan**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-washington-s-compulsive-gambling/),
its [**costly and
disastrous**](https://tomdispatch.com/rewarding-failure/) weapons
systems, and its [**undemocratic
embrace**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-thinking-about-the-unthinkable-2020-style/) of
warriors
and [**militarism**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-american-militarism-on-steroids/). Nevertheless,
I remain a lieutenant colonel, if a retired one. I still have my
military ID card, if only to get on bases, and I still tend to say "we"
when I talk about my fellow soldiers, Marines, sailors, and airmen (and
our "guardians," too, now that we have a Space Force).

[]{#anchor}So, when I talk to organizations that are antiwar, that seek
to downsize, dismantle, or otherwise weaken the MIC, I'm upfront about
my military biases even as I add my own voice to their critiques. Of
course, you don't have to be antiwar to be highly suspicious of the U.S.
military. Senior leaders in "my" military have [**lied so
often**](https://tomdispatch.com/integrity-optional/), whether in the
Vietnam War era of the last century or in this one about "progress" in
Iraq and Afghanistan, that you'd have to be asleep at the wheel or
ignorant not to have suspected the official story.

Yet I also urge antiwar forces to see more than mendacity or malice in
"our" military. It was retired general and then-President Dwight D.
Eisenhower, after all, who first warned Americans of the profound
dangers of the military-industrial complex in his [**1961 farewell
address**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OyBNmecVtdU). Not enough
Americans heeded Ike's warning then and, judging by our near-constant
state of warfare since that time, not to speak of our ever-ballooning
"defense" budgets, very few have heeded his warning to this day. How to
explain that?

Well, give the MIC credit. Its tenacity has been amazing. You might
compare it to an invasive weed, a parasitic cowbird (an image
I've [**used
before**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-drowning-in-militarism/)),
or even a metastasizing cancer. As a weed, it's choking democracy; as a
cowbird, it's gobbling up most of the "food" (at least half of the
federal discretionary budget) with no end in sight; as a cancer, it
continues to spread, weakening our individual freedoms and liberty. 

Call it what you will. The question is: How do we stop it? I've offered
suggestions in the past; so, too, have writers for *TomDispatch* like
retired Army Colonel [**Andrew
Bacevich**](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/) and retired
Army Major [**Danny
Sjursen**](https://tomdispatch.com/spilling-ink-and-spilling-blood/), as
well as [**William
Hartung**](https://tomdispatch.com/what-price-defense-2/), [**Julia
Gledhill**](https://tomdispatch.com/spending-unlimited/), and [**Alfred
McCoy**](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/alfredmccoy/) among
others. Despite our critiques, the MIC grows ever stronger. If Ike's
warning wasn't eye-opening enough, enhanced by an even more powerful
speech, "[**Beyond
Vietnam**](https://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/mlkatimetobreaksilence.htm),"
by Martin Luther King, Jr., in 1967, what could I and my
fellow *TomDispatch* writers possibly say or do to make a difference?

Maybe nothing, but that won't stop me from trying. Since I am the MIC,
so to speak, maybe I can look within for a few lessons that came to me
the hard way (in the sense that I had to live them). So, what have l
learned of value?

**War Racketeers Enjoy Their Racket**

In the 1930s, Smedley Butler, a Marine general twice decorated with the
Medal of Honor, wrote a book entitled [***War Is a
Racket***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_Is_a_Racket). He knew
better than most since, as
he [**confessed**](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/253269-i-spent-33-years-and-four-months-in-active-military) in
that volume, when he wore a military uniform, he served as "a racketeer,
a gangster for capitalism." And the corporate-driven racket he helped
enable almost a century ago by busting heads from the Caribbean to China
was small-scale indeed compared to today's thoroughly global one.

There's an obvious lesson to be drawn from its striking endurance,
never-ending enlargement, and distinct engorgement in our moment (even
after all those lost wars it fought): the system will not reform
itself.  It will always demand and take more --- more money, more
authority, more power.  It will never be geared for peace.  By its
nature, it's authoritarian and distinctly less than honorable, replacing
patriotism with service loyalty and victory with triumphant budgetary
authority.  And it always favors the darkest of scenarios, including at
present a [**new cold
war**](https://tomdispatch.com/arsenal-of-democracy-or-simply-an-arsenal/) with
China and Russia, because that's the best and most expedient way for it
to thrive.

Within the military-industrial complex, there are no incentives to do
the right thing.  Those few who have a conscience and speak out
honorably are punished, including truth-tellers in the enlisted ranks
like [**Chelsea
Manning**](https://theintercept.com/2016/05/19/chelsea-manning-appeals-unprecedented-conviction/) and [**Daniel
Hale**](https://bracingviews.com/2021/07/23/daniel-hales-heartfelt-letter-against-drone-warfare/). Even
being an officer doesn't make you immune.  For his temerity in resisting
the Vietnam War, [**David M.
Shoup**](https://taskandpurpose.com/news/medal-of-honor-hero-david-shoup-vietnam/),
a retired Marine Corps general and Medal of Honor recipient, was
typically dismissed by his peers as unbalanced and of questionable
sanity.

For all the talk of "mavericks," whether in *Top Gun* or elsewhere, we
--- there's that "we" again (I can't help myself!) --- in the military
are a hotbed of go-along-to-get-along conformity.

Recently, I was talking with a senior enlisted colleague about why so
few top-ranking officers are willing to speak truth to the powerless
(that's you and me) even after they retire. He mentioned credibility. To
question the system, to criticize it, to air dirty laundry in public is
to risk losing credibility within the club and so to be rejected as a
malcontent, disloyal, even "unbalanced." Then, of course, that
infamous [**revolving
door**](https://www.pogo.org/analysis/2022/01/the-pentagons-revolving-door-keeps-spinning-2021-in-review) between
the military and giant weapons makers like Boeing and Raytheon simply
won't spin for you.  Seven-figure compensation packages, like the one
current Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin [**gained from
Raytheon**](https://www.pogo.org/database/pentagon-revolving-door/people/lloyd-j-austin) after
his retirement as an Army general, won't be an option. And in America,
who doesn't want to cash in while gaining more power within the system?

Quite simply, it pays so much better to mouth untruths, or at least
distinctly less-than-full-truths, in service to the powerful. And with
that in mind, here, at least as I see it, are a few full truths about my
old service, the Air Force, that I guarantee you I won't be applauded
for mentioning. How about this as a start: that the production of F-35s
--- an overpriced "Ferrari" of a fighter jet that's both [**too complex
and remarkably successful as an
underperformer**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-a-wasteful-weapon-for-america-s-forever-wars/) ---
should be canceled (savings: as much as \$1 trillion over time); that
the much-touted new [**B-21 nuclear
bomber**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-enabling-armageddon/) isn't
needed (savings: at least \$200 billion) and neither is the
new [**Sentinel Intercontinental Ballistic
Missile**](https://www.defensenews.com/air/2022/04/05/heres-the-new-name-of-the-us-air-forces-next-gen-nuke/) (savings:
another \$200 billion and possibly the entire Earth from doomsday); that
the KC-46 tanker is [**seriously
flawed**](https://breakingdefense.com/2022/12/after-years-of-kc-46-vision-system-troubles-boeing-thinks-its-finally-cracked-the-code/) and
should be canceled (savings: another \$50 billion). 

Now, tote it up. By canceling the F-35, the B-21, the Sentinel, and the
KC-46, I singlehandedly saved the American taxpayer roughly \$1.5
trillion without hurting America's national defense in the least. But
I've also just lost all credibility (assuming I had any left) with my
old service.

Look, what matters to the military-industrial complex isn't either the
truth or saving your taxpayer dollars but keeping those weapons programs
going and the money flowing. What matters, above all, is keeping
America's economy on a permanent wartime footing both by buying endless
new (and old) weapons systems for the military and [**selling them
globally**](https://tomdispatch.com/arsenal-of-autocracy/) in a
bizarrely Orwellian pursuit of peace through war. 

How are Americans, Ike's "alert and knowledgeable citizenry," supposed
to end a racket like this? We certainly should know one thing by now:
the MIC will never check itself and Congress, already part of it thanks
to impressive campaign donations and the like by major weapons makers,
won't corral it either.  Indeed, last year, Congress shoveled [**\$45
billion**](https://www.politico.com/news/2022/11/30/house-senate-negotiators-45b-biden-defense-budget-00071367) more
than the Biden administration requested (more even than the Pentagon
asked for) to that complex, all ostensibly in your name. Who cares that
it hasn't won a war of the faintest significance since 1945. Even
"victory" in the Cold War (after the Soviet Union imploded in 1991) was
thrown away. And now the complex warns us of an onrushing "new cold war"
to be waged, naturally, at tremendous cost to you, the American
taxpayer.  

As citizens, we must be informed, willing, and able to act. And that's
precisely why the complex seeks to deny you knowledge, precisely why it
seeks [**to isolate
you**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-the-face-of-war-don-t-look/) from
its actions in this world. So, it's up to you --- to us! --- to remain
alert and involved. Most of all, each of us must struggle to keep our
identity and autonomy as a citizen, a rank higher than that of any
general or admiral, for, as we all need to be reminded, those wearing
uniforms are supposed to serve you, not vice-versa.

I know you hear otherwise. You've been told repeatedly in these years
that it's your job to "support our troops." Yet, in truth, those troops
should only exist to support and defend you, and of course the
Constitution, the compact that binds us all together as a nation.

When misguided citizens genuflect before those troops (and then ignore
everything that's done in their name), I'm reminded yet again of Ike's
sage warning that only Americans can truly hurt this country. Military
service may be necessary, but it's not
necessarily [**ennobling**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-wars-don-t-make-heroes/). America's
founders were profoundly skeptical of large militaries, of entangling
alliances with foreign powers, and of permanent wars and threats of the
same. So should we all be.

**Citizens United Is the Answer**

No, not *that* "[**Citizens
United**](https://truthout.org/articles/corporations-are-citizens-what-are-we/),"
not the case in which the Supreme Court decided corporations had the
same free speech rights as you and me, allowing them to coopt the
legislative process by drowning us out with massive amounts of "speech,"
aka dark-money-driven propaganda. We need citizens united against
America's war machine.

Understanding how that machine works --- not just its waste and
corruption, but also its positive attributes --- is the best way to
wrestle it down, to make it submit to the people's will. Yet activists
are sometimes ignorant of the most basic facts about "their"
military. So what? Does the difference between a sergeant major and a
major, or a chief petty officer and the chief of naval operations
matter? The answer is: yes.

An antimilitary approach anchored in ignorance won't resonate with the
American people. An antiwar message anchored in knowledge could,
however. It's important, that is, to hit the proverbial nail on the
head. Look, for example, at the traction Donald Trump gained in the
presidential race of 2015-2016 when he did something few other
politicians then dared do: dismiss the Iraq War as wasteful and
stupid. His election win in 2016 was not primarily about racism, nor the
result of a nefarious Russian plot. Trump won, at least in part because,
despite his ignorance on so many other things, he spoke a fundamental
truth --- that America's wars of this century were horrendous blunders.

Trump, of course, was anything but antimilitary.
He [**dreamed**](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-parade/trump-wants-military-parade-in-washington-washington-post-idUSKBN1FR03K) of
military parades in Washington, D.C. But I (grudgingly) give him credit
for boasting that he [**knew
more**](https://archive.thinkprogress.org/generals-want-nothing-to-do-with-trump-0a5ad80cb682/) than
his generals and by that I mean many more Americans need to challenge
those in authority, especially those in uniform.

Yet challenging them is just a start. The only real way to wrestle the
military-industrial complex to the ground is to cut its funding in half,
whether gradually over years or in one fell swoop. Yes, indeed, it's the
understatement of the century to note how much easier that's said than
done. It's not like any of us could wave a military swagger stick like a
magic wand and make half the Pentagon budget disappear. But consider
this: If I could do so, that military budget would still be roughly
\$430 billion, easily more than China's and Russia's combined, and more
than seven times what this country spends on the State Department. As
usual, you get what you pay for, which for America has meant more
weapons and disastrous wars.

Join me in imagining the (almost) inconceivable --- a Pentagon budget
cut in half. Yes, generals and admirals would scream and Congress would
squeal. But it would truly matter because, as a retired Army major
general once told me, major budget cuts would force the Pentagon to
think --- for once. With any luck, a few sane and patriotic officers
would emerge to place the defense of America first, meaning that
hubristic imperial designs and forever wars would truly be reined in
because there'd simply be no more money for them.

Currently, Americans are giving the Pentagon all it wants --- plus
some. And how's that been working out for the rest of us? Isn't it
finally time for us to exercise real oversight, as Ike challenged us to
do in 1961? Isn't it time to force the Pentagon to pass an audit each
year --- it's failed [**the last
five**](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/2022/11/22/why-cant-the-dod-get-its-financial-house-in-order/)!
--- or else cut its budget even more deeply? Isn't it time to hold
Congress truly responsible for enabling ever more war by voting out
military sycophants? Isn't it time to recognize, as [**America's
founders
did**](https://bracingviews.com/2013/06/28/no-nation-can-preserve-its-freedom-in-the-midst-of-continual-warfare/),
that sustaining a vast military establishment constitutes the slow and
certain death of democracy?

Just remember one thing: the military-industrial complex won't reform
itself. It just might have no choice, however, but to respond to our
demands, if we as citizens remain alert, knowledgeable, determined, and
united. And if it should refuse to, if the MIC can't be tamed, whether
because of its strength or our weakness, you will know beyond doubt that
this country has truly lost its way.

Copyright 2023 William J. Astore

*Follow TomDispatch on *[***Twitter***](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[***Facebook***](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[**Songlands**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** *(the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[**Every Body Has a
Story**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[**A Nation Unmade by
War**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[**In the Shadows of the American Century:
The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, John
Dower's *[**The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World War
II**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20), *and
Ann Jones's* **[****They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story****](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**.**

**William J. Astore**, a retired lieutenant colonel (USAF) and professor
of history, is
a [***TomDispatch***](https://tomdispatch.com/imperial-dominance-disguised-as-democratic-deterrence/)[** regular **](https://tomdispatch.com/imperial-dominance-disguised-as-democratic-deterrence/)and
a senior fellow at the Eisenhower Media Network (EMN), an organization
of critical veteran military and national security professionals. His
personal blog is [***Bracing Views***](https://bracingviews.com/).

**Thanks to \<a href="https://tomdispatch.com"\>TomDispatch.com**

-   
