# POW Nation

![Prisoners of War" by Otto Dix](pow-2.jpg){class="alarge"}

### When Will America Free Itself From War?

## BY [**WILLIAM ASTORE**](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

"POWs Never Have A Nice Day." That sentiment was captured on a button a
friend of mine wore for our fourth grade [**class
photo**](https://tomdispatch.com/reclaiming-american-idealism/) in
1972.  That prisoners of war could never have such a day was reinforced
by the sad face on that button.  Soon after, American POWs would indeed
be released by their North Vietnamese captors as the American war in
Vietnam ended.  They came home the next year to a much-hyped [**heroes'
welcome**](https://www.c-span.org/video/?313093-1/president-nixons-toast-returned-prisoners-vietnam-war) orchestrated
by the administration of President Richard Nixon, but the government
would never actually retire
its [**POW/MIA**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_League_of_Families_POW/MIA_Flag) (missing-in-action)
flags.  Today, almost half a century later, they continue to fly at
federal installations, including the U.S. Capitol as it was breached and
briefly besieged last week by a mob incited by this country's lame-duck
president, ostensibly to honor all U.S. veterans who were either POWs or
never returned because their bodies were never recovered.

Remembering the sacrifices of our veterans is fitting and proper; it's
why we set aside Memorial Day in May and Veterans Day in November.  In
thinking about those POWs and the dark legacy of this country's
conflicts since World War II, however, I've come to a realization.  In
the ensuing years, we Americans have all, in some sense, become
prisoners of war.  We're all part of a culture that continues
to [**esteem
war**](https://bracingviews.com/2013/10/20/war-what-is-it-good-for-profit-and-power/), [**embrace
militarism**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-drowning-in-militarism/),
and devote [**more than
half**](https://www.nationalpriorities.org/analysis/2020/militarized-budget-2020) of
federal discretionary spending to wars, weaponry, and the militarization
of American culture.  We live in a country that leads the world in
the [**export**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-hartung-trumping-the-arms-market/) of
murderous munitions to the grimmest, most [**violent
hotspots**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-hartung-how-to-stuff-the-middle-east-with-weaponry/) on
the planet, enabling, for example, a genocidal conflict in Yemen, among
other conflicts.

True, in a draft-less country, few enough Americans actually don a
military uniform these days.  As 2021 begins, most of us have never
carried a military identification card that mentions the [**Geneva
Convention**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geneva_Convention_(1929)) on
the proper and legal treatment of POWs, as I did when I wore a uniform
long ago.  So, when I say that all Americans are essentially POWs, I'm
obviously using that acronym not in a legal or formal way, but in the
colloquial sense of being captured by some phenomenon, held by it,
subjected to it in a fashion that tends to restrict, if not eliminate,
freedom of thought and action and so compromises this country's belief
in sacred individual liberties.  In this colloquial sense, it seems to
me that all Americans have in some fashion become prisoners of war, even
those few "prisoners" among us who have worked so bravely and tirelessly
to resist the phenomenon.

Ask yourself this question: During a deadly pandemic, as the American
death toll approaches 400,000 while still accelerating, what unites
"our" representatives in Congress?  What is the only act that draws wide
and fervent bipartisan support, not to speak of a [**unique
override**](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/congress-override-trump-first-time/2021/01/01/eaca9c96-4c51-11eb-a9d9-1e3ec4a928b9_story.html) of
a Trump presidential veto in these last four years?  It certainly isn't
providing health care for all or giving struggling families checks for
\$2,000 to ensure that food will be on American tables or that millions
of us won't be evicted from our homes in the middle of a pandemic.  No,
what unites "our" representatives
is [**funding**](https://www.thenation.com/article/politics/relief-checks) the
military-industrial complex to the tune of \$740.5 billion in fiscal
year 2021 (though the real amount spent on what passes for "national
security" each year regularly exceeds a [**trillion
dollars**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-hartung-the-trillion-dollar-national-security-budget/)). 
Still, that figure of \$740.5 billion in itself is already higher than
the combined military spending of the [**next 10
countries**](https://www.pgpf.org/blog/2020/05/the-united-states-spends-more-on-defense-than-the-next-10-countries-combined),
including Russia and China as well as U.S. allies like France, Germany,
and the United Kingdom.

Not only that, but Congress [**added
language**](https://www.military.com/daily-news/2020/12/05/congress-moves-block-us-troop-withdrawal-afghanistan-and-germany.html) to
the latest defense bill that effectively blocked efforts by President
Trump before he leaves office on January 20th to mandate the withdrawal
of all troops from Afghanistan (and some troops from Germany).  Though
it's doubtful he would have accomplished such goals anyway, given his
irresolute nature, that Congress worked to block him tells you what you
need to know about "our" representatives and their allegiance to the war
complex.

That said, an irresolute Trump administration has been most resolute in
just one area: selling advanced weaponry overseas. It's been rushing to
export American-made [**bombs,
missiles**](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/dec/30/us-approves-sale-of-290m-in-bombs-to-saudi-arabia),
and [**jets**](https://www.defensenews.com/congress/2020/12/04/official-possible-uae-f-35-deal-can-be-inked-before-trump-administration-ends/) to
the Middle East before turning over government efforts to shill for
America's merchants of death to President Joe Biden and his crew of
deskbound warriors.

Speaking of Biden, that he selected retired [**General Lloyd Austin
III**](https://scheerpost.com/2020/12/09/secretary-of-defense-lloyd-austin-a-certain-kind-of-diversity/) to
be his secretary of defense sends the strongest possible signal of his
own allegiance to the primacy of militarism and war in American
culture.  After all, upon retiring, General Austin promptly cashed in by
joining the board of directors of United Technologies from which he
received \$1.4 million in "stock and other compensation" before it
merged with giant weapons-maker Raytheon and he ended up on the board of
that company. (He holds roughly [**\$500,000 in Raytheon
stock**](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/08/us/politics/lloyd-austin-pentagon-military-contractors.html),
a nice supplement to his six-figure yearly military pension.) 

How better than selecting him as SecDef to ensure that the "military"
and the "industrial" remain wedded in that famed complex?  America's
secretary of defense is, of course, supposed to be a *civilian*, someone
who can exercise strong and independent oversight over America's
ever-growing war complex, not a lifelong military officer and general to
boot, as well as an obvious war profiteer.

**War Is Peace**

As Quincy Institute President Andrew Bacevich so aptly [**put
it**](https://tomdispatch.com/a-good-deed-from-the-wicked-witch/), "many
Americans have made their peace with endless war."  Within America's war
culture, peace activists like [**Medea
Benjamin**](https://www.codepink.org/medea_benjamin) and organizations
like [**Veterans for Peace**](https://www.veteransforpeace.org/) are
seen as not just "radical," but genuinely aberrant. Meanwhile, an
unquestioning acceptance of the fact that this country is now eternally
at war across significant parts of the planet is considered normal, even
respectable.  Certainly, not something to put real time or thought into
considering.

As a result, warmongers like former Trump National Security Advisor John
Bolton are touted in some quarters as [**hard-headed
realists**](https://twitter.com/richlowry/status/976956084622524416). In
seeing the world as a hostile place that Americans need to (but somehow,
almost 20 years later, can't) dominate means their heads are screwed on
straight, unlike those screwy thinkers who advocate for peace.  But
as [**Dorothy
Day**](https://www.womenofthehall.org/inductee/dorothy-day/), the
Catholic peace activist, once said: "Our problems stem from our
acceptance of this filthy, rotten system."  

That Americans mostly refuse to see permanent war as filthy and rotten,
or to think much about it or the "defense" budget that goes with it
showcases the triumph of a broader war culture here.  Whereas this
country's profligate and prodigal military complex has given us stunning
failure after stunning failure overseas (just consider all those
disastrous efforts to win "hearts and minds" from Vietnam to Afghanistan
to Iraq and on and on), it has proved stunningly successful in winning
--- or at least taming --- hearts and minds [**in the
homeland**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-the-pentagon-has-won-the-war-that-matters/). 
How else to explain the way those trillion-dollar-plus "national
security" budgets are routinely rubber-stamped by Congress with hardly a
murmur of protest?

In the twenty-first century, Americans are suffering a form of cognitive
capture in which war has become the new normal.  As an astute reader at
my blog, [***Bracing
Views***](https://bracingviews.com/2020/12/12/pulp-fiction-and-the-vietnam-war/),
put it: "Our desire to live without war is held in a stockade, and every
day that we wake up and walk out into the yard that understanding is
being broken down by the powerful monied elites."

In America's collective stockade of the mind, activism for peace is an
aberration, while acceptance of the war state is second nature.  Small
wonder that Biden's proposed cabinet and administration features so many
neocon-style policymakers who made their peace with war, whether in Iraq
and Afghanistan or Libya and Syria ([**Antony
Blinken**](https://jacobinmag.com/2020/11/joe-biden-administration-cabinet-picks-pro-war-hawks) as
secretary of state; [**Jake
Sullivan**](https://scheerpost.com/2020/12/03/bidens-young-hawk-the-case-against-jake-sullivan/) as
national security advisor; retired general Lloyd Austin as secretary of
defense; and [**Avril
Haines**](https://www.salon.com/2020/12/30/bidens-pick-for-intelligence-chief-avril-haines-is-tainted-by-drones-and-torture/) as
director of national intelligence).  Biden's hawkish picks avidly place
their faith in U.S. military power.  And they will be advising a new
president, who once supported war in Iraq himself and talks not of
reducing "defense" spending but of [**boosting
it**](https://www.democracynow.org/2020/9/11/headlines/joe_biden_says_he_may_further_increase_military_spending_if_elected).

Perhaps you've noticed, in fact, how every president from George W. Bush
in 2001 on has been proud to pose at some point as a "wartime"
president.  Perhaps you've noticed as well that this country can't or
won't close Gitmo, the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
flooded with prisoners from the global war on terror beginning late in
2001, men who will likely be imprisoned until death does us part.

Perhaps this is why the U.S. government "[**tortured some
folks**](https://www.politico.com/story/2014/08/john-brennan-torture-cia-109654),"
as President Obama put it in 2014, and abused Iraqi prisoners at [**Abu
Ghraib**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abu_Ghraib_torture_and_prisoner_abuse) in
Iraq.  (Avril Haines, Biden's proposed national intelligence director,
once
helped [**suppress**](https://www.codepink.org/torture_victims_their_advocates_oppose_morell_haines) evidence
of just such abuse and torture.)  Perhaps this is why every president
starting with George W. Bush has unapologetically smited evildoers
around the world via robotic [**assassin
drones**](https://tomdispatch.com/filling-the-skies-with-assassins/). 
(Remember, the [**drone
assassination**](https://tomdispatch.com/engelhardt-the-assassin-in-chief-comes-home/) of
Iranian Major General Qasem Suleimani at Baghdad International Airport
by one Donald J. Trump?)  Perhaps this is also why U.S. bombing never
seems to stop and those wars never end, even when a president comes into
office promising that they will.  After all, it's so empowering to be a
"wartime" president!

In his novel *1984*, George Orwell put it simply enough when he coined
the slogan "war is peace" for his fictional dystopian society. Randolph
Bourne put it no less simply when, during World War I, [**he
explained**](https://mises.org/library/bourne-war) that "war is the
health of the state."  Rosa Brooks, who worked at the Pentagon, put it
bluntly when she titled her 2016 book [***How Everything Became War and
the Military Became
Everything***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/147677787X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). 
What we have in America today is warfare as welfare, a form of
man-made [**disaster
capitalism**](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-war-what-is-it-good-for-profit-and-power/),
profitable for a few at the expense of the many.

Say it again: We are all POWs now.

**The Time I Met a Real POW**

In the early 1990s, when I was a young captain in the U.S. Air Force, I
served as an escort officer for Brigadier General [**Robinson
Risner**](https://military.wikia.org/wiki/James_Robinson_Risner).  It's
not too much to say that Risner is held in awe in the Air Force.  A
skilled fighter pilot and Korean War ace, he was a colonel and on the
cover of *Time* magazine in 1965, just as the Vietnam War was ramping
up, after which he was shot down and became a POW.  He later wrote *The
Passing of the Night*, a harrowing account of the seven years he spent
as a prisoner in the "Hanoi Hilton," the sardonic name American POWs
gave North Vietnam's Hoa Lo Prison.

What sustained Risner through torture and those years of captivity was
his Christian faith and patriotism.  I vividly recall a talk he gave at
the Air Force Academy about his experiences and how that faith of his
had sustained him.  I've never heard a more vivid evocation of the
spirit of duty, honor, and country sustained by faith in a higher
power.  I was proud to have a photo taken with General Risner, as we
stood next to the trophy named after him and annually awarded to the top
graduate of the Air Force's [**Weapons
School**](https://www.nellis.af.mil/About/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/284156/united-states-air-force-weapons-school/),
the AF's Top Gun, so to speak.

Risner was gracious and compelling, and I was humbled to meet a POW
who'd endured and overcome as much as he had.  Yet, back then (to be
honest), I never gave a thought to his actions as a fighter pilot
leading bombing missions during Operation Rolling Thunder in Vietnam. 
Since the U.S. government had chosen not to officially declare war
against North Vietnam, whether his missions were even legal should have
been open to question.  Lacking such an official declaration, one could
argue that Risner and U.S. POWs like him did not enjoy the legal
protections of the Geneva Convention.  Using American terminology today,
Risner might then have been termed an "enemy combatant" to be held
indefinitely, as the U.S. today holds captives at Guantanamo Bay in
Cuba, POWs who have little hope of ever being released.

To your average American captured by U.S. war culture, objections here
are easy.  Of course, Risner's bombing missions were legal.  Of course,
he deserved to be recognized as a POW and treated decently.  America
never goes to war without righteous cause, in this case the containment
of Communism by any means short of nuclear weapons.  The North
Vietnamese saw it differently, however, perhaps because it was they who
were being bludgeoned and flattened by U.S. military power.

My point is neither to praise Risner nor to bury him.  Rather, it's to
bury war and the culture that breeds and then feeds on it.  The more
Americans facilitate war (largely by ignoring it and so giving it our
tacit approval), the more Washington funds it, the more other people die
because of "our" wars and "our" weaponry, the more this country becomes
a POW nation writ large.

**My Friend's Button Again**

Remember my friend's button, the one that insisted POWs never have a
nice day?  As a POW nation writ large, it should apply to all of us. 
America won't have a nice day again until it extricates itself from war
in all its manifestations.  There will be no nice day until Congress
stops funding munitions makers and starts seeking peace and helping the
sick and poor.  There will be no nice day until Americans hate war with
all the passion now saved for "patriotic" flag waving.  There will be no
nice day until presidents bless peacemakers instead of beseeching God
to [**protect the
troops**](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2020/11/07/annotated-biden-victory-speech/). 

So, the next time you see a POW/MIA flag outside a federal building,
don't dismiss it as a relic of America's past.  Think about its meaning
and relevance in an era of constant global warfare and colossal military
spending.  Then, if you dare, ask yourself if you, too, are a POW of
sorts --- not in the strictly legal sense that applies to formal
militaries in declared wars, but in the sense of this country being
captured by war in all its death, destruction, and despair.  And then
ask yourself, what does America have to do, collectively, to break out
of the POW camp in which it's imprisoned itself?

Upon that question hinges the future of the American republic.

Copyright 2021 William J. Astore

Thanks to \<a href="https://tomdispatch.com"\>TomDispatch.com\</a\>

*Follow *TomDispatch *on *[***Twitter***](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[***Facebook***](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new dystopian
novel *[***Frostlands***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20) *(the
second in the Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[***Every Body Has a
Story***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[***A Nation Unmade by
War***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[***In the Shadows of the American Century:
The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[***The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since
World War
II***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
