# Beyond Donald Trump

### When Poisons Curdle

## by [Andrew
Bacevich](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/)

When Martin Luther King preached his famous sermon "[**Beyond
Vietnam**](https://kinginstitute.stanford.edu/king-papers/documents/beyond-vietnam)"
at Riverside Church in New York City in April 1967, I don't recall
giving his words a second thought. Although at the time I was just up
the Hudson River attending West Point, his call for a "radical
revolution in values" did not resonate with me. By upbringing and given
my status as a soldier-in-the-making, radical revolutions were not my
thing. To grasp the profound significance of the "the giant triplets of
racism, extreme materialism, and militarism" to which he called his
listeners' attention was beyond my intellectual capacity. I didn't even
try to unpack their meaning.

[]{#anchor}In that regard, the ensuing decades have filled a void in my
education. I long ago concluded that Dr. King was then offering the
essential interpretive key to understanding our contemporary American
dilemma. The predicament in which we find ourselves today stems from our
reluctance to admit to the crippling interaction among the components of
the giant triplets he described in that speech. True, racism, extreme
materialism, and militarism each deserve --- and separately sometimes
receive --- condemnation. But it's the way that the three of them
sustain one another that accounts for our nation's present parlous
condition.

Let me suggest that King's prescription remains as valid today as when
he issued it more than half a century ago --- hence, my excuse for
returning to it so soon after [**citing
it**](https://tomdispatch.com/andrew-bacevich-the-all-american-way/) in
a previous *TomDispatch*. Sadly, however, neither the American people
nor the American ruling class seem any more inclined to take that
prescription seriously today than I was in 1967. We persist in rejecting
Dr. King's message.

Martin Luther King is enshrined in American memory as a great civil
rights leader and rightly so. Yet as his Riverside Church Address made
plain, his life's mission went far beyond fighting racial
discrimination. His real purpose was to save America's soul, a
self-assigned mission that was either wildly presumptuous or deeply
prophetic.

In either case, his Riverside Church presentation was not well received
at the time. Even in quarters generally supportive of the civil rights
movement, press criticism was widespread. King's detractors chastised
him for straying out of his lane. "To divert the energies of the civil
rights movement to the Vietnam issue is both wasteful and
self-defeating," the *New York
Times *[**insisted**](http://animalnewyork.com/2015/mlk-honored-icon-48-years-ago-media-attacked/).
Its editorial board assured their readers that racism and the ongoing
war were distinct and unrelated: "Linking these hard, complex problems
will lead not to solutions but to deeper confusion." King needed to
stick to race and let others more qualified tend to war. 

The *Washington Post *agreed. King's ill-timed and ill-tempered
presentation had "diminished his usefulness to his cause, to his
country, and to his people." According to the *Post's *editorial board,
King had "done a grave injury to those who are his natural allies" and
"an even greater injury to himself." His reputation had suffered
permanent damage. "Many who have listened to him with respect will never
again accord him the same respect."

*Life *magazine weighed in with its own editorial slap on the wrist. To
suggest any connection between the war in Vietnam and the condition of
Black citizens at home, according to *Life,* was little more than
"demagogic slander." The ongoing conflict in Southeast Asia had "nothing
to do with the legitimate battle for equal rights here in America." 

How could King not have seen that? In retrospect, we may wonder how
ostensibly sophisticated observers could have overlooked the connection
between racism, war, and a perverse value system that obsessively
elevated and celebrated the acquisition and consumption of mere things. 

**More Than the Sum of Its Parts**

In recent months, more than a few stressed-out observers of the American
scene
have [**described**](https://time.com/5917394/2020-in-review/) 2020 as
this nation's Worst. Year. Ever. Only those with exceedingly short
memories will buy such hyperbole. 

As recently as the 1960s, dissent and disorder occurred on a far larger
scale and a more sustained basis than anything that Americans have
endured of late. No doubt Covid-19 and Donald Trump collaborated to make
2020 a year of genuine misery
and [**death**](https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/), with last month's assault
on the Capitol adding a disconcerting exclamation point to the
nightmare. 

But recall the headline events following King's Riverside Church
presentation. The year 1968 began with the Tet Offensive in Vietnam,
which obliterated official claims that the United States was "winning"
the war there. Next came North Korea's audacious seizure of a U.S. Navy
ship, the USS *Pueblo, *a national humiliation*. * Soon after, President
Lyndon Johnson's surprise decision not to run for reelection turned the
race for the presidency upside down. 

In April, an assassin murdered Dr. King, an event that triggered rioting
on a scale dwarfing 2020's disturbances in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Portland, Oregon, and Kenosha, Wisconsin. (Mere days after the
assassination, as I arrived in Washington for --- of all things --- a
rugby tournament, fires were still burning and the skies were still
black with smoke.) That June, not five years after his brother was shot
and killed, Senator Robert Kennedy, his effort to win the Democratic
presidential nomination just then gaining momentum, fell to an
assassin's bullet, his death stunning the nation and the world. The
chaotic and violent Democratic National Convention, held in Chicago that
August and broadcast live, suggested that the country was on the verge
of coming apart at the seams. By year's end, Richard Nixon, back from
the political wilderness, was preparing to assume the reins as president
--- a prospect that left intact the anger and division that had been
accumulating over the preceding 12 months. 

True enough, the total number of American deaths caused by Covid-19 in
2020 greatly exceeds those from a distant war and domestic violence in
1968. Even so --- and even without the menacing presence of Donald Trump
looming over the political scene --- the stress to which the nation was
subjected in 1968 was at least as great as what occurred last year.

The point of making such a been-there/done-that comparison is not to
suggest that, with Trump exiled to Mar-a-Lago, Americans can finally
begin to relax, counting on Joe Biden to "build back better" and restore
a semblance of normalcy to the country. Rather the point is that the
evils afflicting our nation are deep-seated, persistent, and lie beyond
the power of any mere president to remedy. 

**America's Twenty-First-Century Racist Wars**

A devotion to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness defines the
essence of the American way of life. So the Founders declared and so we
are schooled to believe. Well, yes, replied Dr. King in 1967, but
racism, materialism, and militarism have likewise woven themselves into
the fabric of American life. As much as we may prefer to pretend
otherwise, those giant triplets define who we are as much as Jefferson's
Declaration or the Framers' Constitution do. 

For various reasons, Donald Trump not least among them, racism today
again ranks atop the hierarchy of issues commanding national attention.
Political progressives, champions of diversity, cultural elites, and
even multinational corporations attentive to the bottom line profess
their commitment to ending racism (as they define it) finally and
forever. Some not-trivial portion of the rest of the population --- the
white
nationalists [**chanting**](https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-40911744) "You
will not replace us," for example --- hold to another view. The
elimination of racism, assuming such a goal is even plausible, will
surely entail a further protracted struggle.

By 1967, King had concluded that winning that fight required expanding
the scope of analysis. Hence, the imperative of speaking out against the
Vietnam War, which until that moment he had hesitated to do. For King,
it had become "incandescently clear" that the ongoing war was poisoning
"America's soul." Racism and war were intertwined. They fed upon one
another. 

By now, it should be incandescently clear that our own forever wars of
the twenty-first century, fought on a distinctly lesser scale than
Vietnam, though over an even longer period of time, have had a similar
effect. The places that the United States bombs, invades, and/or
occupies typically fall into the category of what President Trump once
disparaged as "[**shithole
countries**](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/white-house/trump-referred-haiti-african-countries-shithole-nations-n836946)."
The inhabitants tend to be impoverished, non-white, non-English
speaking, and, by American standards, often not especially
well-educated. They subscribe to customs and religious traditions that
many Americans view as primitive if not altogether alien. 

That the average G.I. should deem the lives of Afghans or Iraqis of
lesser value than the life of an American may be regrettable, but given
our history it can hardly be surprising. A persistent theme of American
wars going back to the colonial era is that, once the shooting starts,
difference signifies inferiority. 

Although no high-ranking government official and no senior military
officer will admit it, racism permeates our post-9/11 wars. And as is so
often the case, poisons generated abroad have a curious knack for
finding their way home.

With few exceptions, Americans prefer to ignore this reality. Implicit
in the thank-you-for-your-service air kisses so regularly lofted toward
the troops is an illusion that wartime service correlates with virtue,
as if combat were a great builder of character. Last month's assault on
the Capitol should finally have made it impossible to sustain that
illusion. 

In fact, as a consequence of our post-9/11 "forever wars," the virus of
militarism has infected many quarters of American society, perhaps even
more so in our day than in King's. Among the evident results: the spread
of [**racist and
extreme**](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/18/us/politics/military-capitol-riot-inauguration.html) right-wing
ideologies within the ranks of the armed services; the conversion of
police forces into [**quasi-military
entities**](https://fee.org/articles/the-militarization-of-americas-police-a-brief-history/) with
a penchant for using excessive force against people of color; and the
emergence of [**well-armed militia
groups**](https://www.csis.org/analysis/war-comes-home-evolution-domestic-terrorism-united-states) posing
as "patriots" while conspiring to overturn the constitutional order.

It's important, of course, not to paint such a picture with too broad a
brush. Not every soldier is a neo-Nazi --- not even close. Not every cop
is a shoot-first, then-knock racist thug. Not every defender of the
Second Amendment conspires to "stop the steal" and reinstall Donald
Trump in the Oval Office. But bad soldiers, bad cops, and traitors who
wrap themselves in the flag exist in disturbingly large numbers.
Certainly, were he alive today, Martin Luther King would not flinch from
pointing out that the American penchant for war in recent decades has
yielded a host of perverse results here at home. 

Then there's King's third triplet, hidden in plain sight: the "extreme
materialism" of a people intent on satisfying appetites that are quite
literally limitless in a society that has become ever
more [**economically
unequal**](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2019/09/26/income-inequality-america-highest-its-been-since-census-started-tracking-it-data-show/).
Americans have always been the people of more. Enough is never enough.
True in 1776, this remains true today.

A nation in which "machines and computers, profit motives and property
rights" take precedence over people, King warned in 1967, courts
something akin to spiritual death. King's primary concern was not the
distribution of material wealth, but the obsessive importance attributed
to accumulating and possessing it.

Embracing *equity* as a major theme, the Biden administration holds to a
different view. Its [**stated
aim**](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/01/26/fact-sheet-president-biden-to-take-action-to-advance-racial-equity-and-support-underserved-communities/) is
to enable the "underserved and left behind" to catch up, with priority
attention given to "communities of color and other underserved
Americans." In short: more for some, but not for others. 

Such an effort will inevitably produce a backlash. Given a culture
that [**deems
billionaires**](https://www.businessinsider.com/where-do-billionaires-live-top-countries-ranked-2019-5#1-the-united-states-is-still-the-dominant-billionaire-country-15) the
ultimate fulfillment of the American dream, the only politically
acceptable program is one that holds out the promise of more for all.
Since its very first days, the purpose of the American Experiment has
been to satisfy this demand for *more, *even if perpetuating that effort
today inflicts untold damage on the natural environment. 

**Prophetic Deficit**

In his Riverside Church sermon, King mused that "the world now demands a
maturity of America that we may not be able to achieve." In the decades
since, has our nation "matured" in any meaningful sense? Or have the
habits of consumption that defined our way of life in 1967 only become
more entrenched, even as Information Age manipulations to which
Americans willingly submit reinforce those habits further?

Maturity suggests wisdom and judgment. It implies experience put to good
use. Does that describe the America of our time? Again, it's important
to avoid painting with too broad a brushstroke. But ours is a country in
which 74 million Americans voted to give Donald Trump a second term, a
larger total than *any* prior presidential candidate ever received. And
ours is a country in which millions believe that a [**cabal of
Satan-worshiping
pedophiles**](https://www.nytimes.com/article/what-is-qanon.html) controls
the apparatus of government.

Whether wittingly or not, when Joe Biden committed himself in 2020
to [**saving**](https://www.cnn.com/2020/08/20/politics/biden-dnc-speech-transcript/index.html) "the
soul of America," he was echoing Martin Luther King in 1967. But saving
the nation's soul requires more than simply replacing Trump in the Oval
Office, issuing a steady stream of executive orders, and reciting
speeches off a teleprompter (something that Biden does with evident
difficulty).  

Saving that soul requires moral imagination, a quality not commonly
found in American politics. George Washington probably possessed it.
Abraham Lincoln surely did. For a brief moment when delivering
his [**Farewell
Address**](https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc=90&page=transcript),
President Dwight D. Eisenhower spoke in a prophetic voice. So, too, did
Jimmy Carter in his widely derided but enduringly profound "[**Malaise
Speech**](https://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/jimmycartercrisisofconfidence.htm)"
of 1979. But as this mere handful of examples suggests, the rough and
tumble of political life only rarely accommodates prophets.

While Joe Biden may be a decent enough fellow, at no point in his long
but not especially distinguished political career has he ever been
mistaken for possessing prophetic gifts. Much the same can be said about
the highly credentialed political veterans with whom he has surrounded
himself: Kamala Harris, Antony Blinken, Lloyd Austin, Jake Sullivan,
Janet Yellen, and the rest. When it comes to diversity, they check all
the necessary boxes. Yet none of them gives even the slightest
indication of grasping the plight of a nation held in the grip of King's
giant triplets.

As a devout Christian and a preacher of surpassing eloquence, King knew
that salvation begins with an admission of sinfulness, followed by
repentance. Only then does redemption become a possibility.

Only by acknowledging the evil caused by the simultaneous presence of
racism and materialism and militarism at the heart of this country will
it be remotely possible for the United States to take even the first few
halting steps toward redemption. We await the prophetic voice that will
awaken the American people to this imperative.

Copyright 2021 Andrew Bacevich

* ***Andrew Bacevich**,
a [***TomDispatch***](https://tomdispatch.com/reflections-on-vietnam-and-iraq/)[** regular**](https://tomdispatch.com/reflections-on-vietnam-and-iraq/),
is president of the [**Quincy Institute for Responsible
Statecraft**](https://quincyinst.org/). His most recent book is [***The
Age of Illusions: How America Squandered Its Cold War
Victory***](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1250175089/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20). His
new book, *After the Apocalypse: America's Role in a World
Transformed*, will be published in 2021.

[](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/)

Thanks to TomDispatch.com\
