Over these last few years, here's a problem that's sometimes bothered
me: how to translate Donald Trump --- whether, in his initial
presidency-launching moments in 2015 when he was fulminating about those
[Mexican
"rapists"](https://time.com/3923128/donald-trump-announcement-speech/)
or, in his final weeks in the Oval Office, as he
[tweeted](https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2020/12/15/trump-electoral-college-biden/)
furiously about that "fake election"? Sadly enough, it evidently wasn't
a problem for [74
million](https://www.npr.org/2020/11/25/937248659/president-elect-biden-hits-80-million-votes-in-year-of-record-turnout)
Americans, though the number of them still speaking Trumpese seems to be
[dwindling](https://www.cnn.com/2021/02/07/politics/polls-trump-impeachment-future-office/index.html).

Perhaps my problem was that I've never been good at foreign languages. I
used to say that, at the height of my ability to speak French (and that
was when I was young and had a French girlfriend), I could get into any
conversation and out of none. In Chinese, which I also studied once in
my life, I've never forgotten trying to describe something to an old
Chinese man --- possibly almost as old as I am now! --- and having him
sweetly and politely suggest that, next time, I might try using tones.
(Since Chinese is, of course, a tonal language, he was telling me all I
needed to know about my linguistic skills.)

In the years before *TomDispatch*, when I was a book editor, those
minimalist skills of mine always left me with the deepest admiration for
translators. What a talent --- to be able to usher someone like me into
other vibrant worlds that I would never have had access to. In those
years, for instance, I published the work of Uruguayan author Eduardo
Galeano (translated from the Spanish by that wonderful old lefty Cedric
Belfrage). If you don't believe just how magical that world of wonder
they welcomed me into was, then check out Galeano's three volume series
I published in English in those years on the history of the Americas
from the first creation myth to what was then late last night: [*Memory
of Fire:
Genesis*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/156858444X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
[*Faces and
Masks*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1568584458/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
and [*Centuries of the
Wind*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1568584466/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

Or for that matter check out any of [the
works](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1682192296/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
of another author I once had translated and published, Ariel Dorfman,
who has, in these years, become a
[*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/ariel-dorfman-trump-s-divine-fate/)[
regular](https://tomdispatch.com/ariel-dorfman-trump-s-divine-fate/) and
a translator *par excellence* of this strange world we all now live in.
Today, he offers us a little lesson in language skills when it comes to
the Spanish that's so much a part of our American world and yet, in
Trumpese, was
[officially](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/more-5-400-children-split-border-according-new-count-n1071791)
[banished](https://www.politico.com/news/2021/01/12/trump-border-wall-partially-built-458255),
along with the
[Muslims](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/01/25/trump-muslim-ban-legacy-biden/)
the president also hated with a passion. *Tom*

# How Spanish Can Help Us Survive Viral Times

## A Journey into the Heart of a Language We Need Now More Than Ever

By [Ariel Dorfman](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/arieldorfman/)

"*Una nación bajo Diós, indivisible, con libertad y justicia para
todos*."

When Jennifer López [shouted
out](https://www.latimes.com/entertainment-arts/music/story/2021-01-20/biden-inauguration-jennifer-lopez-performance)
that last line of the Pledge of Allegiance in Spanish during Joe Biden's
inauguration ceremony, like so many Spanish-speaking Latinos in the
United States I felt a sense of pride, a sense of arrival.  It was a joy
to hear my native language given a prominent place at a moment when the
need to pursue the promise of "liberty and justice for all" couldn't be
more pressing.

[]{#anchor}A sense of arrival, I say, and yet Spanish arrived on these
shores more than a century before English. In that language, the first
Europeans explorers described what they called "*el Nuevo Mundo*," the
New World --- new for them, even if not for the indigenous peoples who
had inhabited those lands for millennia, only to be despoiled by the
invaders from abroad. The conquistadors lost no time in claiming their
territories as possessions of the Spanish crown and, simultaneously,
began naming them.

Much as we may now deplore those colonial depredations, we still
regularly use the words they left behind without considering their
origins. Florida, which derives from *flor*, flower in Spanish, because
Ponce de León first alighted in Tampa Bay on an Easter Sunday (*Pascua
Florida*) in 1513. And then there is *Santa Fe* (Holy Faith) and *Los
Angeles* (the Angels), founded in 1610 and 1782 respectively, and so
many other names that we now take for granted: Montana (from
*montaña*s), Nevada (from *nieve*, or snow), Agua Dulce, El Paso, and
Colorado, to name just a few. And my favorite place name of all,
California, which comes from a legendary island featured in one of the
books of chivalry that drove Don Quixote, the character created by
Miguel de Cervantes, mad and set him on the road to seek justice for
all.

It was not justice, not *justicia para todos,* however, that the
millions who kept Spanish alive over the centuries were to encounter in
the United States. On the contrary, what started here as an imperial
language ended up vilified and marginalized as vast swaths of the lands
inhabited by Spanish speakers came under the sway of Washington. As Greg
Grandin has
[documented](https://tomdispatch.com/greg-grandin-bricks-in-the-wall/)
in his seminal book, [*The End of a
Myth*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1250214858/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
the expansion of the United States, mainly into a West and a Southwest
once governed by Mexico, led to unremitting discrimination and
atrocities.

It was in Spanish that the victims experienced those crimes: the girls
and women who were raped, the men who were lynched by vigilantes, the
families that were separated, the workers who were
[deported](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2020/10/08/deportation-nation/),
the children who were forbidden to speak their native tongue, the
millions discriminated against, mocked, and despised, all suffering such
abuses in Spanish, while holding onto the language tenaciously, and
passing it on to new generations, constantly renewed by migrants from
Latin America.

Through it all, the language evolved with the people who used it to love
and remember, fight and dream. In the process, they created a [rich
literature](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0393975320/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
and a vibrant tradition of perseverance and struggle. As a result, from
that suppressed dimension of American history and resistance, Spanish is
today able to offer up words that can help us survive this time of
pandemic.

That's what I've discovered as I navigated the many pestilences ravaging
our lives in the last year: the Spanish I've carried with me since my
birth has lessons of hope and inspiration, even for my fellow citizens
who are not among the 53 million who speak it.

**Words of ***Aliento*** for Our Current Struggle**

*Aliento* tops the list of Spanish words that have recently mattered
most to me. It means breath, but also encouragement. *Alentar* is to
give someone the chance to breathe, to hearten them. (Think, in English,
of the word encourage, which comes from the same root as *corazón*,
heart, in Spanish.)

It's worth remembering this connection today, when so many are
[dying](https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/) because they lack breath and not
even a ventilator can save them. Because they don't have *aliento*,
their heart stops. Perhaps they can't breathe because others didn't have
the courage, *el coraje*, to help them survive, didn't rage against the
conditions that allowed them to die unnecessarily. Recall as well that
so many of us in this country felt suffocated in another sense,
breathless with the fear that we wouldn't survive as a republic, not as
a democracy, however imperfect it might have been.

Maybe that's why, last year, so many Americans felt represented by the
next to last words of George Floyd, repeated [more than 20
times](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/jul/08/george-floyd-police-killing-transcript-i-cant-breathe)
before he died: "I can't breathe." If he had cried out those words in
Spanish, he would not have gasped, "*No tengo aliento*," though that
would have been true. He would undoubtedly have said: "*No puedo
respirar*."

*Respirar*. English speakers use the verb "to breathe," but can
certainly appreciate the various echoes *respirar* has in English, since
it's derived from the same word in Latin, "*spirare*," that has
bequeathed us spirit, inspire, and aspire. When we inhale and exhale in
Spanish, I like to think that we're simultaneously in communion with the
sort of spirit that keeps us alive when the going is rough.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1682192296/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

In normal times, the sharing of air is a reminder that we're all
brothers and sisters, part of the same humanity, invariably inhaling and
exhaling one another, letting so many others into our lungs and vice
versa. But these times are far from normal and the air sent our way by
strangers or even loved ones can be toxic, can lead to us expiring. So
rather than *respirar *together in 2021, we need to *inspirar* each
other, to *aspirar* together for something better. We need to band
together in a** **conspiracy of hope so that every one of us on the
planet will be granted the right to breathe, so that good things can
transpire.

As so many of the initial measures of the Biden-Harris presidency
suggest, to begin to undo the venomous divisiveness of the Trump era, we
all need to *tomar* *aliento* or breathe in new ways to survive.  We
need to have more *vida* *juntos* or life with one another in order to
go beyond the masked solitude of this moment, *este momento de*
*soledad*.

**Here Comes the Sun, But Let It Be for All**

As *soledad* originates from that same word, solitude, it undoubtedly
will sound familiar to English speakers. But the Spanish syllables of
*soledad* radiate with the word *sol*, the sun, that antidote to
loneliness and separation, which rises for all or will rise for none,
which warms us all or fries us all or heals us all. And *soledad* also
contains the suffix *dad* (from the verb *dar*, to give), telling us
again that the way out of isolation is to be as generous as sunlight to
one another, especially to those who have more *edad*; who, that is, are
older and therefore at greater risk. To be that *generoso* is not easy.
It may take a lot of work to care for those in need when one is also
facing grief and hardship oneself --- a labor that is frequently
difficult and painful, as the Spanish word for work, *trabajo*, reminds
us.

*Trabajo* is not just physical labor or exertion. It brings to mind
something more distressing. The last novel that Cervantes wrote after
finishing *Don Quixote* was called *Los Trabajos de Persiles y
Segismunda* and there *trabajos* refers to the torments and trials that
two lovers go through before they can be *unidos*, united.

Think of *trabajos* as akin to travails in English and, indeed, many who
toil among us right now during this pandemic are going through special
travails and trouble to keep us fed and sheltered and safe. Called
"essential workers," *trabajadores esenciales*, many of them have
journeyed here from foreign lands after terrible travails and travels of
their own (two words that derive from the same tortuous linguistic
roots). As in the era of Cervantes, so in our perilous times, to leave
home, to wander in search of a secure haven in a merciless world is an
ordeal beyond words in any language.

It gives me solace, though, that when so many of those migrants crossed
the border into the United States where I now live, they brought their
Spanish with them, their throats and lives full of *aliento*,
*inspiración*, *trabajo*, *sol*, and *solidaridad*. Now may be the time
to record them --- or rather *recordarlos* --- in the [deepest
meaning](https://narrative4.com/colum-mccann-on-the-vital-age-of-virtual-storytelling/)
of that word, which is to restore them to our hearts, to open those
hearts to them at a moment when we are all subject to such travails and
plagues.

In concrete policy terms, this would mean creating a true path to
citizenship, *ciudadanía*, for so many millions lacking *documentos*. It
would mean reuniting (*re-unir*) the families that Donald Trump and his
crew
[separated](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/more-5-400-children-split-border-according-new-count-n1071791)
at our southern border and finding the [missing
children](https://www.politico.com/news/2021/01/31/biden-migrant-family-reunification-463999),
*los niños desaparecidos*. It would mean building less disruptive walls
and more roads, *caminos*, that connect us all.

**There Is No ***Unidad*** Without Struggle**

Not all words in Spanish, of course, need to be translated for us to
understand them. *Pandemia*, *corrupción*, *crueldad*, *violencia*,
*discriminación*, *muerte* are sadly recognizable, wretchedly similar in
languages across the globe as are the more hopeful,* justicia*, *paz*,
*rebelión, compasión*. The same is true of President Biden's favorite
word of the moment, *unidad*, to which we should add a verb whose
indispensability he and the Democratic Party should never forget, at
least if there is to be real progress: *luchar* or to struggle.

Equally indispensable is a more primeval word that we can all
immediately identify and make ours: *mamá*. Who has not called out to
his or her mother in an hour of need, as George Floyd did at the very
end of his existence? But the Spanish version of that word contains, I
believe, a special resonance, related as it is to *mamar* --- to suckle,
to drink milk from the maternal breast as all mammals do --- and so to
that first act of human beings after we take that initial breath and
cry.

For those of us who are grown up, an additional kind of sustenance is
required to face an ominous future: "*esperanza*," or hope, a word that
fittingly stems from the same origin as *respirar*.

Many decades ago, Spanish welcomed me into the world and I am grateful
that it continues to give me *aliento* in a land I've now made my own.
It reminds me and my fellow citizens, my fellow humans, that to breathe
and help others draw breath is the foundation of *esperanza*. The native
language that I first heard from my *mamá* --- even though she is long
dead --- still whispers the certainty that there is no other way for the
spirit to prevail in these times of rage and solidarity and struggle,
full of light and *luz *and *lucha*, so we may indeed someday fulfill
the promise of "*libertad y justicia para todos*," of liberty and
justice for all.

Copyright 2021 Ariel Dorfman

*Follow *TomDispatch
*on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and join us
on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check out the
newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new dystopian novel
*[Frostlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
*(the second in the Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* and
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Ariel Dorfman](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/arieldorfman/)

**Ariel Dorfman**, a
[*TomDispatch*](https://tomdispatch.com/ariel-dorfman-trump-s-divine-fate/)[
regular](https://tomdispatch.com/ariel-dorfman-trump-s-divine-fate/), is
the Chilean-American author of *Death and the Maiden.* His most recent
books are
[*Cautivos*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1682192296/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
a novel about Cervantes, the children's story, [*The Rabbits
Rebellion*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07P2S3974/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
and a forthcoming novel about the Apocalypse, *The Compensation Bureau.*
He lives with his wife in Chile and in Durham, North Carolina, where he
is a distinguished emeritus professor of literature at Duke University.
