### A Yankee, a Jew and a Negro in the South before the Brown vs. Board of Education Decision

In 1954, fifty years ago, the U.S. Supreme Court, in the famous
"Brown vs. Board of Education" decision, ruled that a previous court's
decision that race relations must be "separate but equal" was
unconstitutional. The effect of the ruling was that segregation was no
longer legal in public places including, of course, schools.

I'm from New York where, although de facto segregation existed -- and
to a certain extent still does -- it was not condoned by law. As far
as I can remember, there was no black child in my elementary school.
White kids went to the schools in white neighborhoods and black kids
went to the schools near where they lived. In Erasmus Hall High School
however, located farther downtown and nearer to a black neighborhood,
a small minority of black children attended. I can only remember our
star basketball player by name: Johnny Rucker. Brooklyn's population
was predominately Jewish and Catholic at the time and the majority of
students in all public schools was Jewish; the Catholic kids went to
Catholic schools -- naturally! Although my family was nominally
Catholic, I always attended public schools because, I think, my
father, who never went beyond elementary school, had had some bad
experiences in Catholic schools.

Segregation between blacks and whites was the norm and, although my
parents' generation was certainly what we today would call racist, I
don't believe many in my generation were
**consciously** racist. I had a few black
school companions with whom I was friendly, but socially, especially
when girls were concerned, we went our own separate ways.

In 1953, a year before the Brown vs. Board of Education ruling, I
graduated from the Army Language School in Monterey, California, and
had thirty days accumulated leave to take before heading to Germany
(luckily not Korea). The government paid us the airfare to our home
cities and turned us loose. In order to save money, or rather to make
a profit, many of us chose to go by train, hitchhike or, if possible,
drive to our destinations. Those with cars in sufficiently good
condition to make long trips recruited others going to the same
destination to help pay for gas and drive. I had an old beat up Hudson
which wouldn't have made it out of California much less to the East
Coast, so I sold it for fifty bucks before leaving. A friend, Jim
McCray, who was in the same Russian class as I and was going home to
Washington, D.C., told me that a Sergeant in our class who was going
to New York had asked him to go along as far as D.C., but they needed
a third rider to help pay for gas and help with the driving, and was I
interested. You bet I was. But first I'd like to tell you a little
about Jim McCray (his real name).

There were over a hundred students in the Russian class, divided up
into groups of twelve, and Jim was the only Negro. Jim and I used to
go to the bar right at the foot of the hill near the school and drink
beer and listen to Sarah Vaughan on the jukebox and talk. We talked
about jazz, the Russian course, Washington and New York -- not about
the social situation or racial prejudice, which wasn't a hot topic
yet, or philosophy. The bar was mostly a soldier place, which was
good, because there was a wedge in our friendship: women.

I hardly ever saw Jim on weekends when I went to the other bars in
town where there were girls to pick up, with a little bit of luck, or
to San Francisco where the pickings were better. The wedge was that
you couldn't do that together with a black guy, not then. In fact, it
was dangerous in a place like Monterey to even hang out with a black
guy, at least in the bars where the townies hated us soldiers anyway
and a black guy in those places would be like a red (sic) flag to
them. I really didn't know what Jim did on weekends. Maybe he just
stayed in the barracks or found some brothers in the camp who knew
where they could go for fun. You could say that I abandoned him on
weekends, but if my conscience bothered me I didn't let it bother me
too much.

We newly minted Russian linguists were more than happy to be going to
the land of fräuleins hungry for American dollars and, we presumed,
dicks. The sergeant was Karl Lillienthal, a German Jew who spoke
perfect but accented English. The other noncoms called him Lilly; the
rest of us didn't call him anything because he was a silent morose guy
who didn't have much to do with anyone. He was probably the oldest guy
in the course, in his thirties I guessed. How he'd come to be in
sergeant in the United States Army I never found out, because during
the whole trip east he never spoke about himself. He was obviously
perfect for intelligence work in Germany -- a real German who spoke
fluent English and now Russian as well. My social education about
America began with that trip.

The storm warnings came the day before we left. The whole northwest
and north-central parts of the country were being swept by heavy
snowstorms with ninety mile an hour wind-gusts and most roads were
impassable, or at least very dangerous. There were only two
alternatives: wait for the storm to pass or go the southern route.
None of us, least of all Jim, who was anxious to get home, wanted to
delay our departure, so we decided to take the southern route with
good weather and bad vibes for a trio consisting of a Yankee, a Jew
and a Negro. If we kept our mouths shut the Yankee and the Jew
wouldn't be recognized as such, but there was no disguising Jim. We
thought we could take turns driving and in that way go straight
through and avoid all but the most necessary contact with the
natives.    

In Tucson, Arizona, which we considered to be the West not the South,
we had a flat tire. While Sarge waited in the garage for it to be
fixed, Jim and I went across the street to a bar for a beer. It was
mid-afternoon and the place was dark and empty, except for the
bartender, who looked up from his comic book and stared at us
suspiciously when we walked in.

"Two beers, draft please," I told him.

"We don't serve no colored people here," he answered, looking me in
the eye and ignoring Jim, as though I should have changed my order to
one beer and asked permission for the darkie to remain while I drank
it. It was like a slap in the face and I didn't know what to say. The
slap must have hit Jim harder. After standing there with my mouth open
for a few moments I shrugged, looked at Jim and we turned and left. We
didn't speak on the way back to the car, nor did we tell Sarge what
happened. Somehow we were ashamed.

Despite our optimistic intention to drive through to the east coast
without stopping, we couldn't keep our eyes open beyond New Mexico. We
alternated driving, but couldn't sleep sitting up beyond dozing, and
that wasn't enough for safe driving, especially at night, and it got
dark early in mid-winter. Close to midnight on the first day when I
was driving, the headlights flashed on a sign that read: *Negro
Travelers' Inn*. Jim and Sarge, having
been behind the wheel for hours, were dozing and didn't see it. I
pulled over, made a U-turn and went back.

"What's going on?" Sarge asked.

"Let's take a look at this place," I said. "I can't keep my eyes open
much longer." I drove into the parking space in front of the office
and got out. It was the only lighted spot, so there wasn't much to
see. I rang the night bell and waited, while the others dragged
themselves out of the car. Sarge, after checking out the sign,
wondered if the inn -- it was really a motel -- was only for Negroes.
After about five minutes a woman peered out the window at us and
opened the door.

"Yes, what can I do for you gentlemen?" she asked. She was an
attractive middle-aged black woman with large eyes and a worried
look.

"Do you have rooms available for the three of us?" I
asked.

The worry changed into a smile. "Sure do. Come on in and
register."

The rooms were simple and very clean. I fell into bed and slept like
a log.

The next morning Sarge knocked on my door at seven o'clock. "Let's
go," he called through the door. I got up, showered and joined Sarge
and Jim in the dining room, where they were eating breakfasts of bacon
and eggs, toast, juice, coffee -- the works. I ordered the same. The
lady-in-charge who had checked us in the night before was doing the
serving. She must have been curious about us. After all, how often
would two white men and a black man stay together at the Negro
Travelers' Inn? She would surely have asked about us if Jim hadn't
broken the ice after his second cup of coffee.

"Ma'am, we're driving all the way to the East Coast. Could you tell
us if we'll be able to find motels like this along the way? We intend
to drive right through, but in case we don\'t, you know, in case we
can't\..."

"You won't find anything like this, son," a man said who was seated
at a table near us and had overheard the conversation. "In the deep
south you white boys can't stay in the Negro ones either -- not that
you'd want to." He was dressed in a dark suit, white shirt and tie and
had what looked like a sample case next to his leg. Probably a
salesman. "This is the best hotel or motel for Negroes in the whole
southern United States of America."

"I got just what you need, though," the lady said. "I'll be right
back." She walked out of the dining room and through a connecting door
to the office. She was back almost immediately, obviously not wanting
to miss anything. "Here you are," she said as she handed Jim a printed
brochure: *Negro Travelers' Guide Book*.
"Here's all the places to stay right across the South. Some's better
than others, of course, but--"

"And most of them worse than the others," our neighbor
commented.

As Jim leafed through the brochure, the lady finally asked, "How come
you gentlemen traveling like this together through the South?"

Jim explained about us being in the army in Monterey, and that we
were traveling home by car in order to save money. And about the storm
along the northern route, of course.

"Well, I think we'll just drive through from now on," I said
optimistically. When I think back on it, it seems to me that Sarge and
I didn't really want to drive through. It was, after all, much more
comfortable to sleep between clean sheets in one of those sanitized
motels that sprinkle America than being crammed in a speeding piece of
metal for three days. We didn't say or think this, though, not even to
ourselves.

"I never really thought of New Mexico as being part of the South," I
commented to our neighbor.

"Sure, you're thinking about cowboys and Indians, no black folks. New
Mexico's the *South*---West. There are
probably more Indians around here than colored folks, but as far as we
are concerned it's almost as bad as the Deep South where you fellas
are going." He cleaned his mustache delicately with a napkin, stood
up, grasped his sample case, which I now noticed had wheels on the
bottom, and gave us a slight bow. "I wish you gentlemen a good trip
with plenty o'luck, which you might be needing. Bye, Miz Nelly," he
called into the kitchen. "See you next week."

We left New Mexico behind, shook the dust of Texas off our tires, and
were in the middle of Louisiana when the radio started to talk about
the coming Mardi Gras in New Orleans. We were driving on the main road
that connects west to east. I don't know what it looks like today, but
in those days it was just a two-lane road that meandered through the
South. I was feeling lazy myself and thought how interesting it would
be to make a detour to New Orleans, stay there a few days and take in
the Mardi Gras. When I considered my companions, however, I knew it
would be imprudent to even make the suggestion. Jim was intent on
getting out of the South as soon as possible, and our stone-faced
Jewish German crewcut Sarge didn't seem to like it all that much
either. I could have gotten out at any of the towns along the way and
taken a bus or hitchhiked to New Orleans, but somehow that would have
been like abandoning the ship.          

So we kept going, alternating driving, but I couldn't sleep a wink
while I wasn't at the wheel, and I doubt if the others could either.
So we rolled on and on into the state of Mississippi, and at about
midnight, when six eyelids were closing and Jim, at the wheel,
admitted that he couldn't go on driving any farther, we decided that
there was no choice but to bed down in Jackson, the capital of
southern racism.

Jim handed me the *Negro Travelers' Guide
Book* and I found two hotels listed in
Jackson. Now all we had to do was find them. We drove through the
outskirts of town past the genteel whites-only motels' swimming pools
and into the center of town, which was quite deserted.

"There's a diner," I said. "We can ask there."

Jim pulled over in front of the diner, *The Dixie Cup, *and said, "Want me to go in there and ask *Hey, boss, can
y'all tell me where there's a five-star nigger hotel in this beautiful
town?"*

Sarge and I laughed politely, then I said, "Just shut up and don't
stick your nose in white folks' business."

I went into the diner and approached the counterman. "Yes, Suh, what
can we do for y'all?" he smiled warmly. There were about a dozen
customers, all men, mostly drinking coffee or beer in the booths, two
or three at the counter. And, you know, they really do have red necks,
or did then anyway.

"Can you please tell me how to get to North Lester St.?" I asked the
counterman.

His smile disappeared. "That's over in nigger town, ain't it?" He was
looking at me, but when I didn't answer his glance shifted to the
customers at the counter. I realized that everybody in the place was
looking at me.

"Thinking of fixing yourself up with a nigra, Yankee?" God, I had
said a half a dozen words and they had spotted me.

"I'm looking for a hotel for somebody," I said. It occurred to me to
say 'for my chauffeur', but I'm really glad I didn't. At least that
answer brought the situation back to basics.

"Yeah, there's a couple of coon hotels down on North Lester. Straight
ahead to the first traffic light, which probably ain't working this
time of night, but you turn right there and after two or three blocks
you'll hit North Lester. I don't know whether the hotels are up or
down from there, you'll just have to use your nose."
Guffaws.

"Thanks," I said and turned heel. I got into the car and told Jim to
**go**.

"I thought you might have brought back a few hamburgers for us,"
Sarge, who always seemed to be hungry, said from the back
seat.

We found the first hotel without any difficulty in a rundown Negro
residential area. One look at the hotel, however, which was so rickety
it looked as if the big bad wolf could have blown it over with one
puff, and we decided to go to the other hotel on the list, which was
on the same street a few blocks farther on.

From the outside it looked as bad as the first one, but the list
ended there. Without a word, Jim got out of the car, crossed the
street, climbed the steps to the porch of the hotel and rang the
night-bell. After a few words with the man who opened the door, he
came back to the car and handed me his wallet.

"Hang on to this for me, will you, Frank? You have to pay in advance
here, which I've already done, so I won't need any more money. See you
tomorrow morning. Pick me up early, please." 
He turned, walked back and entered the hotel. Sarge got out of the back seat and sat behind the wheel. I
looked at Jim's wallet in my hand and felt a lump in my throat. I
wondered if Sarge felt anything. We drove out of town to a spotless
motel, which turned out to be cheaper than Jim's flea
box.

We picked Jim up early the next morning and went on our way with Jim
asleep in the back seat. We didn't ask him how it was, we could
imagine. Stopping only to eat together in the car because, of course,
we couldn't eat together in any restaurant, and buy gas, using "whites
only" and "colored only" restrooms. We didn't use the segregated
drinking fountains though. We got as far as Macon, Georgia, where we
went through the same ritual. We found a hotel on the list that seemed
somewhat better than the Jackson one though

The next day we dropped Jim off in D.C. We said goodbye to him
feeling embarrassed and pissed off by the whole trip. A few hours
later we were in New York, where Sarge was kind enough to drop me off
at a subway station. I can't blame him for not wanting to drive into
Brooklyn.

Jim and I sailed on the same troop ship to Germany, but since
everybody was seasick we didn't have much chance to talk. In Germany I
was assigned to Military Intelligence; Jim was too---as a truck driver
ferrying "confidential supplies" between Frankfurt and Berlin. We had
no contact and I never saw him again. Over the years I've thought of
looking him up, but never did.

Just thought this experience might be of interest to you readers who
are too young to know what race relations were like in the U.S. back
then before the "Brown vs. Board of Education" decision.

FTS
