![](goya-letter.jpg){class="a"}

# Letters to the Editor

RE: [A Streetcar Named Karma](https://southerncrossreview.org/135/streetcar-karma.html)

Dear Frank Thomas Smith,

Thanks for that nice story!! I've thought, from time to time, that some
anthro with pockets should offer a yearly prize for the best short story
(or play---maybe a separate prize) that has, as its context, a spiritual
understanding of life.

Walter Alexander

\*

Hi Frank, good afternoon.

First of all excuse my poor English but I think practice makes perfect.
I prefer WhatsApp rather than email. I have already read your story \"A
streetcar named Karma\". Marvellous story. Its plot caught my attention
from the beginning to the end. I could see a strong romantic idea, which
led the narrative. On the other hand I found a wide vocabulary, some
idiomatic expression, many words and phrasal verbs which are in a
superior level for me. But patiently and with a good dictionary I could
overcome obstacles. From now I have to learn how to apply these
expressions in my English.\
Thank you so much Frank. I really enjoyed your story and it was useful.
I go for more.\
See you soon,

Marcelo\
Dr. Marcelo Barrionuevo

Villa de las Rosas, Argentina

\*\*\*

RE: [Sojourn in the South by a Yankee, a Jew and a Negro](https://southerncrossreview:org/135/yankee-jew-and-negro.html)

Hello,

!953 was the year I got married, at the age of 21.  (I wonder how many
old readers you have.)  You are correct\-\--Life was worse for Negroes
then. We think it is now very bad, but a lot of younger people have no
idea what \"the situation in the south\", (as we would term it in
college-years late night discussions,) was like. They may have a notion,
especially if they have seen the movie \"The Green Book\", which shed
light on an experience similar to yours. Depending on their age, they
may have had a month of African-American focused studies every year. 
Still, I think your article must have been interesting to many readers. 
Thanks for sharing your real experience. 

It was interesting to read that even in Arizona the prejudice against
non whites was prevalent. I remember being shocked when I was in my
twenties, talking with a friend who grew up in Long Beach, California. 
She said that Mexicans had to sit in the back rows of movie houses.
(Prejudice?? Segregation?? Right here in California??? I had a difficult
time believing it.) 

We Americans still have along way to go, especially in some regions. I
am glad for the progress that has been made. Let\'s hope there is little
backsliding.

 

Beverley Polt in Oakland

\*\*\*

RE: [Coronavirus and the Indwelling Divinity in Each Human Being](https://southerncrossreview.org/134/j-smith-coronavirus.html)

After reading this quite long article, I was sitting back and said loud:
"Wow! What a great article." This is my very first and spontaneous
reaction and I am thrilled about the light and airy wording of such an
interesting but difficult issue. After reading Judith von Halle's
Coronavirus book yesterday, I was intrigued even more by this wise,
talented and interesting woman (I have heard some rumours). What a
wisdom and then, today, this article with so much information but also
clarity and lightness, which is not always the case in anthroposophical
writings; I am encouraged again and I thank you very much for this
information in a clear, light and non judgemental way.

Warm regards,

An (Australia)

\*

Thank you Jeremy Smith for writing this excellent review!! Thank you
Frank Thomas Smith for translating!!! Frank, please translate Judith von
Halle\'s  auto-biography.  Charge a high price and give a donation to
her Free Society of Anthroposophy, I own, have read and continue to
re-read all of JvH\'s books.  Her work has an enlivening and
motivational effect on me.  I LOVE her.

 Ed Shook

Colorado, USA

\*

Thanks for sharing this important article.

Ute Craemer,

Sao Paulo, Brazil

\*

Thank you! Appreciated this initiative very much, especially in light of
the difficulties she mentioned of getting to know about her work,
without all the personal hype. I hope to meet Judith von Halle some
day! How does one subscribe to your newsletter? Best greetings in the
new year,

Barbara Vall (or Wall),

Bandhagen, Stockholm, Sweden

\*\*\*

RE: [Swedenborg](https://southerncrossreview.org/135/swedenborg.html)

Dear Frank,

I have read this GA 253 (12 Sept, 1915) lecture, it was really good. I
would like to mention that Steiner\'s lecture 2 days later (14 Sept,
1915, still GA 253) elaborates on Swedenborg\'s clairvoyance even
further by pointing out its relation to sexuality, so I would definitely
publish that lecture, too:
<https://wn.rsarchive.org/GA/GA0253/19150914p01.html>

Cheers, Norbert

Hungary

\*

Frank Thomas, that is an awesome lecture and a sound reminder of the
sorts of trouble we can get into by transferring habits from one plane
of knowledge to the next.  I am wondering if something specific prompted
you  to distribute at this time?  Is there a meaning I could be missing?

Raun Griffiths 

Constance Bay Ontario 

\*\*\*

RE: [POW Nation](https://southerncrossreview.org/135/astore-pow-nation.html)

Dear Sir, thank you for sending this nugget of wisdom and insight. I
served 2 tours in Vietnam as an infantryman. It was a sad time. Despair
was both my friend and my enemy. The lives and treasure that are
literally thrown to the dogs year in and year out in is an indictment of
both aberrant policy and a polity clouded by the detritus of
materialism. If we are truly 'woke' then as a people we will have to
rise and soon, or all will be lost to the desperate, destructive and
devious desire to spread war near and far for 30 pieces of silver.  

Sincerely,

James M. Zderic

\*\*\*

RE: [Beyond Donald Trump](https://southerncrossreview.org/135/bacevich-beyond-trump.html)

Dear SCR, thank you for another excellent and timely article from Andrew
Bacevich. I feel I should point out an implied error in the text, as far
as my reading of it goes. It seems from the article that Dr. King's
address, sometimes called ‚Beyond Vietnam', ( I am not sure it was a
sermon but an address to a meeting of ‚Clergy and Laity Concerned') was
given in 1968 as this year is later highlighted and explored in more
detail. In actual fact it was given on April 4th 1967, exactly one year
to the day before his assassination. In my reading of history and the
significance of recurring dates, it seems likely, indeed almost certain,
that the two events are connected. This is confirmed by the extremely
adverse reaction to the address which is detailed by Andrew Bacevich.

I have read and listened to this speech (sometimes simultaneously) many
times. I must thank your good selves and Andrew Basevic for shining more
light upon it and confirming its prophetic nature by the most pressing
of current contexts.

With sincere thanks and best wishes,

Richard Greenslade

\*

Hello,

Are you familiar with the World Economic Forum\'s aims and what \"Build
Back Better\" actually means?  For your information, I am a Mexican-
American and Native American Trump supporter.  I am not really
interested in articles like this which are old news.  I support the
first president in years to start zero wars, brought our troops home,
donated his income to our country each year, let the Patriot Act expire,
and got us out of the TPP.  

Monique verdin

\*\*\*

RE: SouthernCrossReview.org

Dear Frank,

You have my sympathy for your recent computer crash! Our online
conferences are 1000% dependent not only on my own computer, but on the
integrity and dependability of servers that are located in Los Angeles
and, I believe, Iceland as well. It never fails that when we start up
our very intensive and highly populated summer session, either my
computer or the servers undergo hacking, crashing, and otherIssues that
undoubtedly are of the greatest delight to Ahriman and his minions. Your
recent crash undoubtedly indicates that he is concerned that you, too,
may be standing in the way of his mission!

I deeply appreciate all that you bring in the Southern Cross review and
I thank you for having me on your list. My very warmest wishes to you
and your family for a wonderful Christmas on the other side of the
world. (We have some of your countrymen joining us for our southern
hemisphere online conferences right now.)

Very warmly,

Eugene Schwartz

Visit iWaldorf.net

\*

Hello Frank,

I hope you and yours are well. I look forward to the arrival of the SCR
and your work. I found this link below revealing. It seems to me
something newish has come into existence with the support of exploding
communications. Does apophenia provide irresistible answers and calming
explanations to an increasing audience caught in the endorphin supplying
web of social media? Maybe \...

[https://medium.com/curiouserinstitute/a-game-designers-analysis-of-qanon-580972548be5](https://medium.com/curiouserinstitute/a-game-designers-analysis-of-qanon-580972548be5)

Ben Bowers

\*

Thanks, dear Frank!
Just scanning the new collection has already sparked my appetite! I
really appreciate your inter-hemispheric stimuli. I'm happy to pass the
link to my friends „down under" as well as those „up above". (Please
forgive my little neo-colonial joke, I hope you realise that I write
that with a little winking of an eye.)

[Helmut
Reichardt](https://www.facebook.com/groups/244163562939479/user/1185463780/?__cft__[0]=AZVnmpSUIEIZ-1-FMOgfMfbGf7s7HbBsnydPtyZkAjRpQyJOdOone8aFgVIzKf3okPvK-KNDzMqXxuLMRa9QERVFbi1fXtZdi1A2iudvSmenLpc6hN4JpGnYThRn0hXbZJbCw4U0C33UQYpUwnJ8CdCs&__tn__=R]-R)

\*

Dear Frank,\
Your sending articles, when ready, is fine with me. However, a huge
advantage to your readers would result if you sent the entire article or
item.  The need to continue reading by linking to some other site is
time-consuming and ultimately frustrating. Can you send items in full?
With appreciation for your work,\
Ken Ingham

Newton, MA, USA

\*

Receiving the Southern Cross Review has been a treat and I hope that it
can continue.  Thanks for your work over these many years. I have a
suggestion for an article in your publication. My interest is in
learning more about the "Saturn Way" as put forth by Rudolf Steiner.
Bernard Lievegoed has addressed this "Saturn Way" in his book *The Eye
of the Needle. *Some excerpts from this book are attached, e.g., "the
starting point is not the imaginative life as it is in the Moon way but
the life of action." Has anything on on this subject been previously
published in the Southern Cross Review? Or are you aware any initiatives
that have developed the form of the the Saturn Way? Of course, all of
the anthroposophical initiatives like biodynamic agriculture are action
oriented. As great as they initiatives are, most people have little or
no opportunity to be involved in an anthroposophical social
organization. I would love to read in your SCR from someone who has
experience with this reversed way to intuition and could relate to
present conditions in the world.

Leonard Leikas

\*

Hi Frank, 

I love your newsletter and  thought you might like to see this:
<https://patrickwey.com/blog/tag/images-3>

With warm regards

Carol Wolfley

\*

Thank you so much for all the work you are doing. Southern Cross Review
is a great website and I have learnt a lot from it.

Best wishes, Chris Kaufman

