# A Thousand Times Worse
### Or How to Nuke History

![the american flag behind an eagle](eagle.jpg){class="alarge"}

## By [William J. Astore](http://www.tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore)

What pops into your head when you hear the number 1,000 in a
political-military context? Having studied German military history, I
immediately think of Adolf Hitler's confident boast that his Third
Reich would last a thousand years. In reality, of course, a
devastating world war brought that Reich down in a mere 12 years. Only
recently, however, such boasts popped up again in the dark dreams of
Donald Trump. If Iran dared to attack the United States, Trump tweeted
and then repeated on *Fox & Friends*, the U.S. would strike back with
"[1,000
times](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/sep/15/trump-iran-retaliate-1000-times-greater-force)
greater force."

Think about that for a moment. If such typical Trumpian red-meat
rhetoric were to become reality, you would be talking about a
monumental war crime in its disproportionality. If, say, the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard [shot a
missile](https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/12/politics/esper-iraq-attack/index.html)
at an American base in the region and killed 10 U.S. military
personnel, Trump is saying that, in response, he'd then seek to kill
10,000 Iranians \-- an act that would recall Nazi reprisals in World
War II when entire villages like
[Lidice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lidice_massacre) were destroyed
because one prominent Nazi official had been killed. Back then,
Americans knew that such murderous behavior was evil. So why do so
many of us no longer flinch at such madness?

If references to "evil" seem inappropriate to you, keep in mind that I
was raised Catholic and one idea the priests and nuns firmly implanted
in me then was the presence of evil in our world \-- and in me as a
microcosm of that world. It's a moral imperative \-- so they taught me
\-- to fight evil by denying it, as much as humanly possible, a place
in our lives, even [turning the other
cheek](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthew_5:39) to avoid giving
offense to our brothers and sisters. Christ, after all, didn't teach
us to whip someone 1,000 times if they struck you once.

Speaking of large numbers, I still recall Christ's teaching on
forgiveness. How many times, he asked, should we forgive those who
offend us? Seven times, perhaps? No, [seventy times
seven](https://www.gotquestions.org/seventy-times-seven.html). He
didn't, of course, mean 490 acts of forgiveness. Through that
hyperbolic number, Christ was saying that forgiveness must be large
and generous, as boundless as we imperfect humans can make it.

Trump loves hyperbolic numbers, but his are plainly in the service of
boundless revenge, not forgiveness. His catechism is one of
intimidation and, if that fails, retribution. It doesn\'t matter if it
takes the form of mass destruction and death (including, in the case
of Americans, [death by](https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/) coronavirus).
By announcing such goals so openly, of course, he turns the rest of us
into his accomplices. Passively or actively, if we do nothing, we
accept the possibility of mass murder in the service of Trump's dark
dreams of smiting those who would dare strike at his version of
America.

It's easy to dismiss his threats as nothing more than red meat to his
base, but they are also distinctly anti-Christian. The saddest thing,
however, is that they are, unfortunately, not at all un-American, as
any quick survey of this country's record of wanton destructiveness in
war would show.

So while I do reject all Trump's murderous words and empty promises, I
find them strangely unexceptional and unnervingly all-American.
Indeed, my own guess is that he's won such a boisterous following in
this country precisely because he does so visibly, so thunderously, so
[bigly](https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-37483869) embody its
[darkest
dreams](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175665/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_predatory_dreams/)
of destruction, which have all too often become reality when visited
upon recalcitrant peoples who refused to bend to our will.

#### Destruction as Salvation

Americans today are sold an image of war as almost antiseptic \--
hardly surprising given our distance and detachment from this
country's "forever wars." But as history reminds us, real war [isn't
like
that](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1479894613/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
It never was, not when colonists were killing Native Americans in vast
numbers; nor when we were busy killing our fellow Americans in our
Civil War; nor when U.S. troops were ruthlessly putting down the
[Filipino
insurrection](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176642/tomgram%3A_danny_sjursen%2C_the_%28failed%29_war_on_terror%27s_precursor/)
in the early twentieth century; nor when our air force firebombed
Dresden, Tokyo, and so many other cities in World War II and later
nuked
[Hiroshima](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176753/tomgram%3A_nick_turse%2C_one_hundred_seconds_till_the_apocalypse/)
and Nagasaki; nor when North Korea was [flattened by
bombing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bombing_of_North_Korea) in the
early 1950s; nor when Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos were
[bludgeoned](https://bracingviews.com/2017/10/11/the-atrocious-nature-of-the-vietnam-war/)
by bombs, napalm, and Agent Orange in the 1960s and early 1970s; nor
when Iraqis were killed by the tens of thousands during the first Gulf
war of 1990-1991.

And that, of course, is only a partial and selective accounting of the
wanton carnage overseen by past presidents. In reality, Americans have
never been shy about killing on a mass scale in the alleged cause of
righteousness and democracy.

In that sense, Trump's [rhetoric of mass
destruction](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/08/world/asia/north-korea-un-sanctions-nuclear-missile-united-nations.html)
is truly nothing new under the sun (except perhaps in its pure
blustering bravado); Trump, that is, just salivates more openly at the
prospect of inflicting pain on a mass scale on peoples he doesn't
like. And even that isn't as new as you might imagine.

In this century, Republicans have been especially keen to share their
dreams of massively bombing others. On the campaign trail in 2007, to
the tune of the Beach Boys' cover *\"*Barbara Ann,\" Senator (and
former Navy pilot and Vietnam POW) John McCain smirkingly sang of
[bombing
Iran](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U7s5pT3Rris&ab_channel=TheProgressiveMagazine).
(\"Bomb bomb bomb, bomb bomb Iran!\") Similarly, during the Republican
presidential debates of 2016, Senator Ted Cruz boasted of wanting to
"utterly destroy" the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq by
[carpet-bombing](https://bracingviews.com/2016/03/03/might-makes-right-an-american-tradition/)
its territory and, in doing so, making the desert sand "[glow in the
dark](https://www.politico.com/story/2015/12/cruz-isil-bombing-216454)."
The implication was, of course, that as president he'd happily use
nuclear weapons in the Middle East. (Talk about all options being on
the table!)

#### Alarming? Yes! Very American? USA \#1!

Consider two examples from the nuclear era, then and now. In the depth
of the Cold War years, in response to a possible Soviet nuclear
attack, this country's war plans envisioned a simultaneous assault on
the Soviet Union and China that military planners estimated would, in
the end, kill [600
million](https://bracingviews.com/2017/12/28/the-doomsday-machine-the-madness-of-americas-nuclear-weapons/)
people. That would have been the equivalent of 100 Holocausts, notes
[Pentagon whistleblower Daniel
Ellsberg](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608196739/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
who was privy to those plans.

Whether China had joined or even known about the Soviet attack didn\'t
matter. As communists, they were guilty by association and so to be
obliterated anyway. Ellsberg notes that only one man present at the
briefing where this "plan" was presented objected to such a mindless
act of mass murder, [David
Shoup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_M._Shoup), a Marine general
and Medal of Honor winner who would later similarly object to the
Vietnam War.

Fast forward to today and our even more potentially planet-ending
nuclear forces are still being "modernized" to the tune of [\$1.7
trillion](https://www.thenation.com/article/archive/us-nuclear-arsenal-triad/)
over the coming decades. Any
[*Ohio*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohio-class_submarine)[-class](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohio-class_submarine)
SSBN nuclear submarine in the Navy's inventory, for example, could
potentially kill millions of people with its 24 Trident II ballistic
missiles (each carrying as many as [eight nuclear
warheads](https://www.naval-technology.com/projects/ohio-class-submarine),
each warhead with roughly six times the destructive power of the
Hiroshima bomb). While such vessels are officially meant to "deter"
nuclear war, they are, of course, ultimately built to fight one. Each
is a submerged holocaust waiting to be unleashed.

Rarely, if ever, do we think about what those subs truly represent,
historically speaking. Meanwhile, the Pentagon continues to "invest"
(as the military likes to say) in ever-newer generations of
nuclear-capable
[bombers](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176431/tomgram:_william_astore,_enabling_armageddon/)
and land-based missiles, promising a holocaust of planetary
proportions if ever used. To grasp what an actual nuclear war would
mean, you would have to update an old saying: one death is a tragedy;
several billion is a statistic.

Aggravating such essential collective madness in this moment (and the
president's [fiery and
furious](http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176751/tomgram%3A_engelhardt%2C_a_vote_for_the_apocalypse/)
fascination with such weaponry) is Trump's recent cynical call for
what might be thought of as the nuking of our history: the
installation of a truly ["patriotic"
education](https://www.npr.org/2020/09/18/914281543/trump-announces-patriotic-education-commission)
in our schools (in other words, a history that would obliterate
everything but his version of American greatness). That would, of
course, include not just the legacy of slavery and other dark chapters
in our past, but our continued willingness to build weaponry that has
the instant capacity to end it all in a matter of hours.

As a history professor, I can tell you that such a version of our past
would be totally antithetical to sound learning in this or any world.
History must, by definition, be critical of the world we\'ve created.
It must be tough-minded and grapple with our actions (and inactions),
crimes and all, if we are ever to grow morally stronger as a country
or a people.

History that only focuses on the supposedly good bits, however
defined, is like your annoying friend's Facebook page \-- the one that
shows photo after photo of smiling faces, gourmet meals, exclusive
parties, puppies, ice cream, and rainbows, that features a flurry of
status updates reducible to "I'm having the time of my life." We know
perfectly well, of course, that no one's life is really like that \--
and neither is any country's history.

History should, of course, be about understanding ourselves as we
really are, our strengths and weaknesses, triumphs, tragedies, and
transgressions. It would even have to include an honest accounting of
how this country got one Donald J. Trump, a
[failed](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/nyregion/donald-trump-atlantic-city.html)**
**casino owner and celebrity pitchman, as president at a moment when
most of its leaders were still claiming that it was the most
exceptional country in the history of the universe. I'll give you a
hint: we got him because he represented a side of America that was
indeed exceptional, just not in any way that was ever morally just or
democratically sound.

Jingoistic history says, "My country, right or wrong, but my country."
Trump wants to push this a goosestep further to "My country and my
leader, always right." That's fascism, not "patriotic" history, and we
need to recognize that and reject it.

#### Learning without Flinching from History


The United States has been the imperial power of record on this planet
since World War II. Lately, the economic and moral aspects of that
power have waned, even as our military power remains supreme (though
without being able to [win
anything](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176623/tomgram%3A_andrew_bacevich%2C_why_those_%22endless_wars%22_must_never_end)
whatsoever). That should tell you something about America. We're still
a "SmackDown" country, to borrow a term from professional wrestling,
in a world that's increasingly being smacked down anyway.

Harold Pinter, the British playwright, caught this country's imperial
spirit well in his [Nobel Prize
lecture](https://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2005/12/pint-d09.html) in
2005. America, he said then, has committed crimes that "have been
systematic, constant, vicious, remorseless, but very few people have
actually talked about them. You have to hand it to America. It has
exercised a quite clinical manipulation of power worldwide while
masquerading as a force for universal good. It's a brilliant, even
witty, highly successful act of hypnosis."

Anyone with a knowledge of our history knows that there was truth
indeed in what Pinter said 15 years ago. He noticed how this country's
leaders wielded language "to keep thought at bay." Like [George
Orwell](https://www.orwellfoundation.com/the-orwell-foundation/orwell/essays-and-other-works/politics-and-the-english-language/)
before him, Pinter was at pains to use plain language about war,
noting how the Americans and British had "brought torture, cluster
bombs, depleted uranium, innumerable acts of random murder, misery,
degradation and death to the Iraqi people and call\[ed\] it bringing
freedom and democracy to the Middle East."

The point here was not simply to bash America. It was to get us to
think about our actions in genuine historical terms. A decade and a
half ago, Pinter threw down a challenge, and even if you disagreed
with him, or maybe especially if you did so, you need the intellectual
tools and command of the facts to grapple with that critique. It
should never be enough simply to shout "USA! USA!" in an ever-louder
fashion and hope it will drown out not only critics and dissenters but
reality itself \-- and perhaps even your own secret doubts.

And we should have such doubts. We should be ready to dissent. We
should recognize, as America's current attorney general most
distinctly [does
not](https://www.wsj.com/articles/barr-tells-prosecutors-to-consider-charging-violent-protesters-with-sedition-11600276683),
that dissenters are often the truest patriots of all, even if they are
also often the loneliest ones. We should especially have doubts about
a leader who threatens to bring violence against another country 1,000
times greater than anything that country could visit upon us.

I don't need the Catholic Church, or even Christ in the New Testament,
to tell me that such thinking is wrong in a Washington that now seems
to be offering a carnivorous taste of what a future American autocracy
could be like. I just need to recall the wise words of my Polish
mother-in-law: "Have a heart, if you've got a heart."

Have a heart, America. Reject American carnage in all its forms.

*William Astore, a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel, taught
history for 15 years. A
*[TomDispatch](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176732/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_thinking_about_the_unthinkable_%282020-style%29)[*
regular*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176732/tomgram%3A_william_astore%2C_thinking_about_the_unthinkable_%282020-style%29)*,
he also has a personal blog,* [Bracing
Views](https://bracingviews.com/)*.*

*Follow *TomDispatch* on
*[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and join us on
*[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check out the
newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new dystopian novel (the second
in the Splinterlands series)
*[Frostlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
Beverly Gologorsky\'s novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),*
and Tom Engelhardt\'s *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy\'s *[In the Shadows of the American Century:
The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*
and John Dower\'s *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since
World War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

Copyright 2020 William J. Astore

Thanks to \<a href="https://tomdispatch.com"\>TomDispatch.com\</a\>
