# The Gospel according to Mark

![\"Cristo en el Garage\" - Antonio Berni - Argentina, 1905-1981](cristo-garage.jpg)\


## by Jorge Luis Borges


These events took place on the Los Álamos cattle ranch, towards
the south of the township of Junín, during the final days of
March, 1928. The protagonist was a medical student, Baltasar
Espinosa. We may describe him for now as no different to any of
the many young men of Buenos Aires, with no particular traits
worthy of note other than an almost unlimited kindness and an
oratorical faculty that had earned him several prizes from the
English school in Ramos Mejía. He did not like to argue; he
preferred it when his interlocutor was right and not he himself.
Although the vagaries of chance in any game fascinated him, he
played them poorly because it did not please him to win. His wide
intelligence was undirected; at thirty-three years of age, the
completion of one last subject stood in the way of his graduation,
despite its being his favourite. His father, who was, like all
gentlemen of his day, a freethinker, had instructed him in the
doctrines of Herbert Spencer, but his mother, before setting out
on a trip to Montevideo, requested of him that every night he say
the Lord's Prayer and make the sign of the cross. Over the years,
not once had he broken this promise.

He did not lack in courage; one morning he had traded, more out of
indifference rather than wrath, two or three blows with a group of
fellow students who were trying to force him into taking part in a
university demonstration. He abounded in questionable opinions, or
habits of mind, from a spirit of acquiescence: his country
mattered less to him than the risk that in other parts they might
believe that we continue to wear feathers like the Indians; he
venerated France but despised the French; he had little respect
for Americans, but he approved of there being skyscrapers in
Buenos Aires; he thought that the gauchos of the plains were
better horsemen than those of the hills or mountain ranges. When
his cousin Daniel invited him to summer in Los Álamos, he accepted
immediately, not so much because he liked the country, but more
out of his natural geniality and his not having found a valid
reason for saying no.

The ranch's main house was large and somewhat run-down; the
foreman, who was known as Gutre, had his quarters close by. The
Gutres were three: the father, the son (who was particularly
uncouth) and a girl of uncertain paternity. They were tall, strong
and bony, with Indian features about the face and hair that tinged
red. They hardly spoke. The foreman's wife had died years ago.

In the country, Espinosa was learning things that he had not
known, nor suspected. For example, one need not gallop when
approaching a house, and no one goes out riding a horse unless
there is a job to be done. In time, he would come to distinguish
the birds by their calls.

Early on, Daniel had to absent himself and leave for the capital
in order to close a deal involving some livestock. In all, the
business would take him about a week. Espinosa, who was already a
little tired of hearing about his cousin's good fortune with women
and his tireless interest in the variations of men's fashion,
preferred to remain on the ranch with his textbooks. The heat was
suffocating and not even the night brought relief. One morning at
daybreak, thunder woke him. The wind was rocking the casuarinas.
Espinosa heard the first drops of rain and gave thanks to God. All
of a sudden, the cold air rolled in. That afternoon, the Salado
overflowed.

The next day, as he was looking over the flooded fields from his
porch, Baltasar Espinosa thought that the standard metaphor which
compared the pampas with the sea was not, at least that morning,
completely false, even though Hudson had noted that the sea
appears to us much wider because we see it from a ship's deck and
not from horseback or eye level. The rain did not let up; the
Gutres, helped or hindered by the city dweller, saved a good part
of the livestock, though many animals drowned. The paths that led
to the station were four: all were covered in water. On the third
day, a leaking roof threatened the foreman's house and Espinosa
gave them a room out back by the toolshed. The move had brought
them closer; they ate together in the large dining room.
Conversation was difficult; the Gutres, who knew so much about the
country, did not know how to explain any of it. One night,
Espinosa asked them if people still retained some memory of the
Indian raids from when the frontier's military command was in
Junín. They told him that they did, but they would have answered
in a similar fashion had the question been about Charles the
First's beheading. Espinosa recalled his father's saying that
almost all the cases of longevity cited from the country are a
result of poor memory or a vague notion of dates. The gauchos
tended to forget in equal measure the year of their birth and the
name of who fathered them.

No reading material was to be found in the entire house other than
some issues of the magazine *The Farm*, a veterinary manual, a
deluxe edition of the Uruguayan epic *Tabaré*, a *History of
Shorthorn Cattle in Argentina*, the odd erotic or detective story
and a recent novel, *Don Segundo Sombra*. In order to liven up in
some way the inevitable after-dinner conversation, Espinosa read a
couple of the novel's chapters to the Gutres, who were all
illiterate. Unfortunately the foreman, like the book's hero, had
been a cattle drover himself and was not interested in the
happenings of another. He said the work was easy, that they took
with them a pack mule which carried all that they needed, and that
if he had not been a cattle drover, he would never have seen Lake
Gómez, nor would he have gotten to the town of Bragado, nor would
he have visited the Núñez ranch in Chacabuco. In the kitchen was a
guitar; before the events I am narrating happened, the labourers
would sit in a circle and someone would tune the instrument
without ever getting around to playing it. This they called a
guitar jam.

Espinosa, who had let his beard grow, had begun to pause before
the mirror to study his changed face, and he smiled at the thought
of boring the boys in Buenos Aires with his tale of the Salado's
overflowing. Curiously, he was missing places to which he had
never been and would never go: a street corner on Cabrera where a
mailbox stood; some cement lions on a porch a few blocks from the
Plaza del Once on Jujuy; a barroom with a tiled floor whose exact
whereabouts he was not sure of. As for his brothers and his
father, through Daniel they would have learnt already that he was
isolated --- the word, etymologically, was accurate --- by the
floodwaters.

Looking through the house whilst still hemmed in by the waters, he
came across a Bible in English. In its final pages, the Guthries
--- their original name --- had left a record of their family
history. They were originally from Inverness, had come to the New
World, no doubt as labourers, in the early days of the nineteenth
century and had intermarried with Indians. The chronicle broke off
sometime during the eighteen-seventies when they no longer knew
how to write. Within only a few generations, they had forgotten
their English; by the time Espinosa met them, even Spanish was
troubling them. They had no faith, but in their blood there
endured, like a dim current, the harsh fanaticism of the
Calvinists and the superstitions of the pampas. Espinosa told them
of his find and they barely acknowledged it.

Leafing through the volume, his fingers opened it at the start of
the Gospel according to Mark. As an exercise in translation and
perhaps to see if the Gutres would understand any of it, he
decided to read to them the text after dinner. Their attentive
listening and their mute interest surprised him. Maybe the gold
letters on the the cover lent the book more authority. 'It's in
their blood,' Espinosa thought. It also occurred to him that man
has throughout history told and retold two stories: that of a lost
ship that searches the seas of the Mediterranean for a dearly
loved island, and that of a god who allows himself to be crucified
in Golgotha. Remembering his elocution classes in Ramos Mejía,
Espinosa rose to his feet to preach the parables.

In the days that followed, the Gutres wolfed down the barbecued
meat and sardines so as to arrive sooner at the Gospel.

A little pet lamb that the girl had adorned with a sky-blue ribbon
had injured itself on some barbed wire. To staunch the bleeding,
the Gutres were wanting to apply cobwebs; Espinosa treated it with
some pills instead. The gratitude that this treatment inspired
took him aback. At first, he distrusted the Gutres and had hidden
in one of his books the two hundred and forty pesos that he had
with him; now, with the owner away, he had taken on Daniel's role
and was giving timid orders that were being followed immediately.
The Gutres would trail him through the rooms and along the porch
as if they were lost without him. Whilst reading to them, he
noticed that they would take away with them the crumbs that he had
left on the table. One evening, he caught them unawares as they
were, in few words, speaking of him respectfully.

Upon finishing the Gospel according to Mark, he wanted to read one
of the three remaining gospels; the father, though, asked him to
repeat the one he had already read to them so that they could
understand it better. Espinosa felt that they were like children,
who prefer repetition over variety or novelty. That night he
dreamt, not altogether surprisingly, of the Flood and was awoken
by the hammering that went into the Ark's construction, which he
supposed he had confused with the thunder. In fact, the rain,
after having abated, was getting heavier. The cold was bitter. The
Gutres had told him that the storm had damaged the toolshed's roof
and that, once they had repaired the beams, they would show him
where. No longer a stranger, they treated him with special
attention, almost spoiling him. Not one of them liked coffee, but
they always had a little cup for him that they heaped with sugar.

The storm hit on a Tuesday. Thursday night he was awoken by a
light knock on the door, which, because of his misgivings, he
always kept locked. He got up and opened it: it was the girl. In
the darkness he could not make her out, but he could tell from her
footsteps that she was barefoot, and later in bed, that she had
come naked from the back of the house. She did not embrace him,
nor did she speak a single word; she lay beside him and shivered.
It was the first time she had lain with a man. When she left, she
did not kiss him; Espinosa realised he did not even know her name.
For some sentimental reason that he did not attempt to understand,
he swore never to tell anyone in Buenos Aires about the incident.

The next day began like the others before, except for the father's
speaking to Espinosa and asking him if Christ had allowed Himself
to be killed in order to save all mankind. Espinosa, who was a
freethinker but felt obliged to justify what he had read to them,
replied, "Yes. To save us all from hell."

Gutre then asked, "What's hell?"

"A place underground where souls burn and burn."

"And those that drove in the nails were also saved?"

"Yes," replied Espinosa, whose theology was a little shaky.

He had feared that the foreman would demand an account of what had
happened the night before with his daughter. After lunch, they
asked him to read the last chapters again.

Espinosa took a long siesta, though his light sleep was
interrupted by persistent hammering and vague premonitions. Toward
evening he got up and went out to the porch. He said, as if
thinking out loud, "The waters are low. It won't be long now."

"It won't be long now," repeated Gutre like an echo.

The three Gutres had been following him. Kneeling on the floor,
they asked for his blessing. Then they cursed him, spat on him and
shoved him to the back of the house. The girl was crying. Espinosa
knew what to expect on the other side of the door. When they
opened it, he saw the heavens. A bird shrieked. 'A goldfinch,' he
thought. The shed was without a roof; they had torn out the beams
to build the cross.


Translation: Antonios Sarhanis -
[www.anagrammatically.com](http://anagrammatically.com)

[borges-marcos.html](Español)
