# Sleeping Beauty and the Year 2020


![Anelia Pavolova \"**The Dream of Venus**\"](dream-of-venus.jpg){class="alarge"}

## By Richard Cooper



Who has not been taken aback by the unprecedented events of this year?
Going forward, we are undoubtedly in a time of change, but what kind of
change, and what may be learnt from *times of change* that have gone
before? Much can be learnt when we more deeply question the events of
one hundred years ago and see the movement of spiritual history in
relation to 2020. Rudolf Steiner has drawn our attention to looking at
history through the lens of 100 years. Each 100-year phase carries 3 x
33 1/3 years within it, to make a total of one hundred. Steiner showed
how the rhythm of 331/3 years mirrors the life of Christ on earth, from
birth to crucifixion and resurrection. It is therefore important to
explore how we may reconnect with what was initiated 100 years ago, in
its positive and negative aspects, to gain insight into mankind's
struggle toward the Christ impulse.

100 years ago from the ominous outbreak of the Coronavirus Crisis in
2020, the official implementation of the Treaty of Versailles was signed
on the 10 January, 1920. The Treaty, enforcing reparation payments on
Germany for its war guilt, was instrumental in laying the groundwork for
the historical events that would later unfold, notably, the rearmament
of Germany leading to the Second World War and the world order that
would emerge after 1945. Quite aptly, the signing had taken place in the
Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles, in Paris, France, being
rather symbolic of an elite struggling to pursue their own national and
established political concerns separated from any of the spiritual
implications of the decisions before them.

1920 was also a crucial time for anthroposophy. After introducing the
Threefold Social Order during the First World War to offer an
alternative to the new world system taking shape, Steiner's impulse had
failed to find resonance. In contrast to the tragic years of darkness
with the First World War, the opening of the First Goetheanum [^1]on 26
September in that year can be seen as a light filled artistic response
to the needs of the world. The Goetheanum, cited as a masterpiece of
modern architecture, was named after Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and was
conceived as a *'total work of art'* (*Gesamtkunstwerk*) that would
bring together lectures, Steiner's new art of movement *Eurythmy*,
*Speech Formation*, Sculpture, Painting and Theatre, including Steiner's
own *Mystery Dramas.*

The three forms of Culture, Politics and Economy striven for in the
Threefold social Order, Rudolf Steiner reworked into an impulse for a
new spiritual understanding of Religion, Art and Natural Science. After
the tragic burning of the First Goetheanum -- it was destroyed by arson
stemming from opposition to Steiner's work -- just over two years later,
at the New Years's Eve of 1922/1923, Steiner had referred to the
spiritual '*sleepiness*' of the anthroposophists around him at the time,
emphasizing the importance of *active *inner life. His complaint was of
necessity and dire need, for he wished to encourage further and future
spiritual engagement in spite of the deep pain that he felt, as did many
others, at the tragic event of the burning.

In a lecture course given a year after the fire on 31 December 1923, now
available under the title *World History in the Light of Anthroposophy*,
Steiner made a comparison between the burning of the First Goetheanum
and the burning of the Temple of Artemis (associated with the Roman
goddess Diana) at Ephesus 356 BC by Herostratus. He described the
spiritual background to this event as a deed expressing the *Jealousy of
the Gods*: whilst with the First Goetheanum in more materialistic times,
it was rather the *Jealousy of Men.* The Temple at Ephesus' high point
was through the 6^th\ ^and 5^th^ century BC, notably the time of the
Greek philosophers such as Heraclitus (535 -- 475 BC) who dedicated his
influential work *On Nature *to the temple of Artemis. Steiner explains
how the pupils of the Temple of Ephesus, through spiritual training,
would enter into a spiritual state and look down from within the life
(etheric) realm of the spiritual world -- from the etheric widths of
etheric space -- on the temple of Ephesus and that the Gods had felt
jealousy of what man was thus experiencing. The historian Plutarch
described that the goddess Artemis was more concerned with the birth of
Alexander the Great than the burning of her Temple at Ephesus,
highlighting an awareness that from the spiritual perspective the course
of history was changing, and that the focus would be more on those
individuals who would carry the teachings of the mysteries into the
world.

For Alexander the Great was indeed born in the same year of the fire,
356 BC. Though him the teachings of Aristotle (born 384 BC) from whom he
was schooled, were carried by Alexander's conquests and seeded into the
Middle East and further to India. Aristotle's synthesis of philosophy
and ethics of nature observation, as had been once nurtured in the
*Ancient Mysteries,* has laid the basis for almost every form of
knowledge in Western civilisation. Steiner places this in a wider
spiritual context, in relation to Christ. He describes how the *Jealousy
of the Gods* had permeated the world from that time on.

When we consider Steiner's reference to the *Gods*, stated in the
plural, with the quote from Exodus 34:14 -- *For thou shalt worship no
other god: for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God* -- we
may reflect on the monumental significance of times that were at hand.
For with Christ, a *new testament* to the spiritual world would come to
unite mankind in a new way with the spiritual world. Steiner emphasizes
thaat in Ancient Greek times, Christ had ever-closer approached to the
earth, yet in Christ's case, rather than jealousy, Christ was filled
rather with love for humanity. Christ's love for humanity when he walked
the earth shows the fulfillment in deed of that great feeling of love
that had carried him through time to his spiritual descent to the earth.

#### The Ancient Greek Myth Persephone

In pre-Christian times, Demeter was the goddess for the growth of crops
from spring to summer, while Hades they saw as the god of the winter
season, when the sun seemed to sink into the earth. However, they also
perceived this passage between growth and death as the *movement* of
nature itself through the seasons, as a goddess whose purpose was to
connect the two realms, the over and the underworld. This figure was
Persephone. The myth describes how when she was playing in a flowery
meadow with her Nymph companions, Kore (the maiden 'name' of Persephone)
was seized by Hades and carried off to the underworld as his bride. Her
mother, Demeter, despaired and searched for her, accompanied by the
torch-bearing threefold goddess of the underworld, Hecate. When Demeter
learned that Zeus had conspired in her daughter\'s abduction she was
furious and refused to let the earth bear any fruit until Persephone was
returned. Zeus consented, but because Persephone had tasted of the food
of Hades -- a handful of pomegranate seeds -- she was forced to forever
spend a part of the year with her husband in the underworld.

The Ancient Greek myths were expanded upon to the pupils of the
mysteries. Steiner describes how students of Ephesus would walk around
the glades, paths and groves, with the sea to one side and the temple to
the other. Their intimate conversations of spiritual teachings,
perceptions of the twilight and the natural world around them, they
would then carry with them, as a kind of soul preparation, into the
nights where the spiritual world would speak to them. It is fascinating
to reflect that John the Evangelist and Mary mother of Jesus spent their
last years in Ephesus, a meeting of the old and the new mysteries. In
contrast to the times before Christ, John and Mary at Ephesus would
teach from their personal witness of Christ's deeds and life on earth
and revelation of the future meaning for the world of his resurrection.

Many of these new dynamics we may see in the plays of Shakespeare,
notably and prominently in *Pericles Prince of Tyre*, where the Prince
of the title also has to embark on a quest marked by sea catastrophes to
re-establish the link between spiritual forces, nature and human
society. The parallels to the story of Persephone are striking. Yet the
message of* *hope for inner personal transformation, redemption and hope
are *new*. After exile from a corrupt land where his life is in danger,
and grief at his blows of fate, eventually Pericles rises triumphant. He
recovers his lost daughter *Marina* and reunites with his wife *Thaisa,
*after being called in dream by Diana to the temple* *at Ephesus:

When we consider that after Christ's resurrection the spiritual
mysteries flow into society through individual impulse, the well-known
fairy tale *Sleeping Beauty* highlights how aspects of the myth of
Persephone has been woven into world history. The fairy tale can be
found in numerous versions, from Grimm's German 1812 version *Little
Briar Rose*, to Giovan Battista Basile\'s *Sun Moon and Talia* (1634),
yet the themes of this story story go even further back to the
mythological legendary compendium of stories about early Britain in
*Pereceforest*.[^2] In one excerpt drawn from Geoffery of Monmouth's
*History of the Kings of Britain* (1136) Pereceforest describes how
Alexander is on his way by sea to the coronation of India's new king
when they are blown off course in a storm. They arrive in Britain and
discover the poor state of the country. Here the sleeping beauty figure
is called Zellandine, for whom a prince is required to release from the
enchantment.

#### A Dweller in Three Worlds

The basis of much of Rudolf Steiner's research method he describes in
detail through the spiritual historical background to Rosicrucianism and
its founder Christian Rosencreuz. We may consider here the rose (the
emblem of Rosicrucianism), and specifically its thorny stem. Contrasted
with the pure sap and fructifying lance of sunlight, the stem hardens at
various points and forms the spikes of the thorns, resting at intervals
up the stem. This process of inwardly reflecting on the contrast of the
tender blossoming of the flower and the hardened intervals of the
thorns, is an example of natural sensual perception and thinking, which
is thereby organic rather than intellectual.

In essence, the most ancient form of Rosicrucianism involves learning to
think imaginatively *into *the natural world and thereby making
connection to human society. The Sleeping Beauty fairy tale can be
considered a meditation on the transformation and purification of these
interwoven forces of life and destiny. The story starts with a king and
queen who had longed for a child to no avail. In contrast to the joy
when the queen finally gives birth, immediately an evil force confronts
them. Here follows a part of the opening sequence to the Brothers Grimm
*Sleeping Beauty* fairy tale, aptly named in another version *Brier Rose
*or indeed the German '*Dornröschen*' (thorn rose):

*"When the christening was over, the feast came. Before each of the
fairies was placed a plate with a spoon, a knife, and a fork---all pure
gold. But alas! As the fairies were about to seat themselves at the
table, there came into the hall a very old fairy who had not been
invited."*

The *Bad Fairy* in Sleeping Beauty is instrumental in leading to the
cursed sleep of the queen. She states that if she should prick her
finger on a spinning wheel she will die. The first king does all he can
to prevent the princess from finding anything like a spinning wheel with
which she might prick her finger and draw blood. When the inevitable
happens, that the king had so sought to offset, the 100-year curse is
enacted.

*At that same moment the king and his attendants returned, and everyone
began to fall asleep: the horses in the stalls, the pigeons on the roof,
the dogs in the courtyard, the flies on the walls. Even the fire on the
hearth flickered, stopped moving, and fell asleep. (...) And a thorn
hedge grew up around the entire castle, growing higher and higher, until
nothing at all could be seen of it.*

The action then shifts to a new time when a prince (following the failed
attempts of many others before him) then seeks out the princess in new
land hidden in dense forest. We can note how in the Giambattista
version, the princess Talia gives birth to twins*, Sun* and *Moon*, who
are instrumental in leading the story to its happy end, after the
resolution of the curse, here represented as a splinter of flax:

*Now after nine months Talia delivered two beautiful children, one a boy
and the other a girl. In them could be seen two rare jewels, and they
were attended by two fairies, who came to that palace, and put them at
their mother\'s breasts. Once, however, they sought the nipple, and not
finding it, began to suck on Talia\'s fingers, and they sucked so much
that the splinter of flax came out.*.

In the beginning, the king symbolizes the intellectual defensiveness
against spiritual knowledge that would increasingly gain ground as
mankind lost this more ancient perception of the spiritual worlds. He
then has to embark on the quest to reawaken the princess as a symbol of
spiritual wisdom. The original *Bad Fairy* also transforms; she becomes
in the Giambattista version the jealous *Evil Queen*, to whose
instrumental role we are granted the following insight in her
confrontation with the princess, Talia:

*The queen, not for pity of the unhappy lady, but to gain also those
robes, which were embroidered with gold and pearls, told her to undress,
(...) With every item that she removed Talia uttered a loud scream.
Having taken off her robe, her skirt, the bodice, and her shift, she was
on the point of removing her last garment, when she uttered a last
scream louder than the rest. They dragged her towards the pile, to
reduce her to ashes.*

At this moment the king enters and finally sees the impending evil
before his eyes. Previously he had denied and defended himself against
higher knowledge, yet now he has made the conscious journey through the
enchanted forest of thorns and redeemed the spiritual relationship to
his princess. He now sees where his spiritual ignorance has placed him,
whereby, in this tale, the evil queen has fed him, as food without his
knowing, his own murdered children

*Alas! Then I, myself, am the wolf of my own sweet lambs. Alas! And why
did these my veins know not the fountains of their own blood?*

He orders the evil queen to be burnt in her own *wickedly-devised *fire.
However, at this moment there is the wonderful revelation: the cook had
not followed the[]{#anchor} demands to kill the children and had
substituted them for lambs. At this very moment, the cook steps forward
to explain and bring forth the children: and the King realizes with
great joy, how his wife and children have been saved by the cook.

\"*If it is true that you have saved my children, be sure that I will
take you away from turning the spit, and I will put you in the kitchen
of this breast, to turn and twist as you like all my desires, giving you
such a reward as shall enable you to call yourself a happy man in this
world.\"*

It is a moment of deep humility and thankfulness; of the king's
self-knowledge of his own connection to higher realities and their
karmic effect on those around him. The Rosicrucian impulse is
highlighted throughout the stories in their interweaving of the three
realms: natural, human and spiritual, -- of inner pictures of destiny
and transformation, with the more ancient themes of rebirth, death,
initiation and hope.

![Anelia Pavolova "**Behold He Comes**" (Ecce Venit)\", 2017](behold-he-comes.jpg){class="alarge"}

#### Awakening from Persephone to Michael

When we try to feel into these times, of 1920 and our own 2020, we are
struck by dramatic spiritual events of the fire, and the artistic
testimony to the Spirit. But we may also be touched in admiration for
individual karmic tasks and courage. When speaking of the burning of the
First Goetheanum, Rudolf Steiner refers, in contrast to the *Jealousy of
the Gods* at Ephesus, to the *Jealousy of Men* of the more materialistic
twentieth century. It was karma that was often deeply determinate.

Carl Unger, one of the leading original anthroposophists and
industrialist pioneers of the threefold social order collaborative '*Der
Kommende Tag AG'* (in English, *The Coming Day)* was shot dead before a
lecture in 1929, by a mentally disturbed anti-Semite; while Michael
Bauer died in 1929, after needing to step back from public lectures in
1920, after giving a seminar before 200 people -- the audience had been
told beforehand to regard all he said about anthroposophy with suspicion
and fear. Steiner himself died before his time, in 1925, while Edith
Maryon, Steiner's collaborator on the only surviving wooden sculpture
from the fire, the *Representative of Man*, died in 1924. Both Rudolf
Steiner and Edith Maryon had invested so much artistic life in their
collaboration that the shock of the burning was for her especially
devastating. *The Representative of Man* had been the center piece of
the Goetheanum, depicting Christ holding the balance between the
adversary powers of Lucifer and Ahriman. Miraculously, this wooden
sculpture survived.

100 years on from 1920, we can remember Steiner's most pressing
concerns: that others would take up the work of initiation and that a
new spiritual science would permeate all areas of life and society. As
with anthroposophy, and society in a wider sense, the princess in
Sleeping Beauty awakes from her slumber with a kiss from the prince, yet
the castle and all the attendants lie around her as if frozen in time.
This year's Coronavirus Crisis revealed a stark resistance to conscious
change, where once more multinational concerns seek to protect a system,
which, in effect, is undermined by its own confused economic and
materialistic policies. At Michaelmas 2020, we may find courage;
creatively. As we see above, Michael carries the sword with the dragon
curled below and the angels riding on the horses, heralding the advent
of spiritual experience. Whether considering nature, karma or human
society, active thinking is a deed which with the power of Michael's
sword may unearth the fear and materialism that stands in contrast to
Michael's serious and noble expression of cosmic intelligence, to
present to us new vistas for practical human life.

*Richard Cooper* is originally from the UK. He moved to Switzerland in
2003 after studying history, art history and psychology at university,
and anthroposophy, storytelling and poetry at Emerson College. He is
self employed as a business-English coach in Switzerland and completed
further education in Fine Art in 2012. He writes on anthroposophical
themes and gives lectures and seminars. On 26 September 2020 Richard
founded \'anthroposophicum\' in commemoration of the 100-year
anniversary of the opening of the First Goetheanum. An impulse to deepen
anthroposophical esoteric work, it is also seen as an invitation to
like-minded people to work together to better understand contemporary
occult issues. Focus initially is on three specific areas: Rudolf
Steiner\'s Karma Lectures; First-Class lessons, and symptomatic
observations of history. Collaboration in the English-speaking world,
and in German, is part of Richard Cooper\'s future aims for
anthroposophicum. Supplementary articles, additional artistic work and
details of events can be seen at
[]{#anchor-1}[www.anthroposophicum.com](http://www.anthroposophicum.com/)

[^1]: 

[^2]: 
