# A Vote for the apocalypse

![art by Juri Jabsky](trump-3.jpg){class="alarge"}

### Fire and Fury Like the World Has Never Seen

## By [Tom Engelhardt](http://www.tomdispatch.com/authors/tom)

It was August 2017 and Donald Trump had not yet warmed up to Kim
Jong-un, North Korea's portly dictator. In fact, in typical Trumpian
fashion, he was pissed at the Korean leader and, no less typically, he
[lashed
out](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/08/world/asia/north-korea-un-sanctions-nuclear-missile-united-nations.html)
verbally, threatening that country with a literal hell on Earth. As he
put it, "They will be met with fire and fury like the world has never
seen." And then, just to make his point more personally, he complained
about Kim himself, "He has been very threatening beyond a normal
state.\"

Only a year and a half later, our
[asteroidal](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176512/tomgram%3A_engelhardt%2C_living_on_a_quagmire_planet)
president would, of course,
[say](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/we-fell-in-love-trump-and-kim-shower-praise-stroke-egos-on-path-to-nuclear-negotiations/2019/02/24/46875188-3777-11e9-854a-7a14d7fec96a_story.html)
of that same man, "We fell in love." Still, that threat by an American
leader to \-- it was obvious \-- launch a nuclear strike for the first
time since Hiroshima and Nagasaki were nearly obliterated in August 1945
was memorable. The phrase would, in fact, become the title of a 2018
bestselling book, [*Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White
House*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1250301467/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
by journalist Michael Wolff. Two years later, amid so many other
threatening phrases from this president, "fire and fury" has, however,
been left in history's dustbin, largely forgotten by the world.

**"This Is Not an Act of God"**

Too bad, since it seems so much more relevant now that California,
Oregon, and Washington, not to speak of a Southwest already officially
in a
"[megadrought](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/climate-change-has-helped-fuel-a-megadrought-in-the-southwest/),"
have experienced the sort of apocalyptic fire and fury (and heat and
smoke) that has turned daytime skies an eerie nighttime
[orange](https://sfist.com/2020/09/09/14-photos-of-san-francisco-landmarks-under-a-bladerunner-2020-orange-sky/)
(or
[yellow](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/sep/13/donald-trump-wildfires-california-oregon-washington-robert-reich)
or even purple, claims a friend of mine living in the San Francisco Bay
Area). We\'re talking about a fire and fury that\'s forced cars to put
on their headlights at noon; [destroyed
towns](https://www.usnews.com/news/top-news/articles/2020-09-09/explosive-western-us-wildfires-threaten-oregon-towns)
(leaving only armed right-wing militants behind amid the flames to
[await](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/11/us/fires-oregon-antifa-rumors.html)
imagined Antifa looters); burned millions of acres of land, putting
hundreds of thousands of Americans under [evacuation
orders](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/sep/10/wildfires-us-california-oregon-washington-latest-death-toll);
turned startling numbers of citizens into refugees under pandemic
conditions; and crept toward
[suburbs](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/11/us/fires-oregon-california-washington.html)
and cities, imperiling the world as we've known it.

In the wake of the [hottest
summer](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2020/sep/14/northern-hemisphere-record-hottest-summer-noaa)
on record in the Northern Hemisphere, we are, in other words, talking
about the sort of apocalyptic conditions that the president undoubtedly
had in mind for North Korea back in 2017, but not even faintly for the
U. S. of A; we're talking, that is, about a burning season the likes of
which no one in the West has ever seen before, a torching linked to the
overheating of this planet thanks to the release of fossil-fuel-produced
greenhouse gasses in ever greater quantities. In fact, as Washington
Governor Jay Inslee pointed out recently, we shouldn't even be talking
about "wildfires" anymore, but about "[climate
fires](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/sep/11/oregon-fires-california-washington-deaths-wildfires)"
whose intensity has already outpaced by years the predictions of most
climate scientists. (Or, as Inslee put it, "This is not an act of God.
This has happened because we have changed the climate of the state of
Washington in dramatic ways.")

Significant hunks of the American West have now been transformed into
the natural equivalent of furnaces, with fires even reaching the
suburban edges of Portland, Oregon (which, for days, had the [worst air
quality](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/portland-seattle-air-quality-worst-in-world_n_5f5bc14bc5b6b485080034ad?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAACUB-N0qZ3b9U-h_H0GYcN3NeYSQTHvEYtwjzMg8hfSjWnfyL-RG3CJ1e-QYjVBfL9ZEB6bv7ugaq3NS9FuDRoN5P-CHowyD0nQh7sGRGqaUnjJ25zgwqC2DwcPC2wdCGU5VA7r3IQdm5jwPkbVnzN84-i9feuuyHrSXwVlQTApp)
of any major urban area on the planet), and promising a future in which
cities will undoubtedly be [swept
up](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/sep/12/wildfires-are-striking-closer-and-closer-to-cities-we-know-how-this-will-end)
in such conflagrations, too. Admittedly, Donald Trump didn't threaten to
launch "fire and fury like the world has never seen" against Portland
(though he did
[send](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/25/us/portland-federal-legal-jurisdiction-courts.html)
federal agents there to snatch peaceful protesters off its streets and
continues to insult and
[threaten](https://www.npr.org/sections/live-updates-protests-for-racial-justice/2020/08/31/907870503/trump-threatens-intervention-after-portland-violence)**
**that city's mayor). If anything, as the fires scorched those states to
a crisp, he did his best to
[avoid](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2020/09/11/trump-isnt-talking-about-wildfires-oregon-california/)
the subject of the burning West, as in these years more generally he's
largely treated climate change (that
"[hoax](https://time.com/5622374/donald-trump-climate-change-hoax-event/)")
like\... well, a pandemic that should be ignored while America stayed
"open."

And it's not a subject he\'s been grilled on much either, not until
recently when Western governors began laying into him over [his
stance](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/13/us/politics/california-fires-trump-climate-change.html)
on climate change. To offer just one example, as far as I can tell, Bob
Woodward, the *Washington Post* editor and [court
chronicler](https://www.thenation.com/article/politics/woodward-scoop-trump-coronavirus/)
of presidents who, for months, had unparalleled access to Trump and
grilled him on so many subjects, never bothered to ask him about the
most important, most dystopian, most apocalyptic future Americans face.
And mainstream Democrats didn't [do much
better](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/sep/12/wildfires-democrats-climate-crisis)
on the subject while those fires were building to a crescendo until Joe
Biden finally
[called](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/15/us/elections/biden-calls-trump-a-climate-arsonist-as-the-president-denies-the-science-of-wildfires.html)
the president a \"climate arsonist.\" He added, aptly enough, \"If you
give a climate arsonist four more years in the White House, why would
anyone be surprised if we have more of America ablaze?\"

There's no question that, at the beck and call of the fossil-fuel
industry, Donald Trump and his demonic crew have worked without qualms
or remorse to ensure that this would be a fiery and furious America.
Freeing that industry of restrictions of every sort,
[withdrawing](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/04/climate/trump-paris-agreement-climate.html)
from the Paris climate accord,
[opening](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2020/08/17/trump-drilling-arctic-national-wildlife-refuge-alaska/)
up yet more areas for oil drilling, [wiping
out](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/climate/trump-environment-rollbacks.html)
environmental safeguards, and even (at the very moment when the West was
burning)
[appointing](https://www.npr.org/2020/09/12/912301325/longtime-climate-science-denier-hired-at-noaa)
a climate-science denier to a top position at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, the president and his crew proved themselves
to be
[pyromaniacs](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176605/tomgram:_engelhardt,_pyromaniacs,_inc./)
of the first order.

Of course, the heating of this planet has been intensifying for decades
now. (Don't forget, for instance, that Barack Obama presided over a U.S.
fracking boom that left people referring to us as "[Saudi
America](https://www.sej.org/publications/bookshelf/saudi-america-truth-about-fracking-and-how-its-changing-world).")
Still, this president and his top officials have put [remarkable
energy](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/trump-administration-completes-climate-dismantling-with-methane-rollback/)
(so to speak) into releasing yet more carbon dioxide and methane into
the atmosphere. And here's the strange thing: they made it deep into the
present apocalyptic moment in the West without \-- [Greta
Thunberg](https://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/176610/tomgram%3A_engelhardt%2C_%22make_america_greta_again%22/)
and climate change protesters aside \-- being held faintly accountable
for their urge to fuel the greatest danger humanity faces other than
nuclear weapons. In fact, as is increasingly obvious from the torching
of the West, what we're beginning to experience is a slow-motion version
of the nuclear apocalypse that Trump once threatened to loose on North
Korea.

In an all-too-literal fashion, The Donald is indeed proving to be
history\'s "fire and fury" president.

And don't for a moment think that there was no warning about the
over-the-top burning now underway in this country. After all, in 2019,
parts of Australia were singed to a crisp in a way never before seen,
killing at least 25 humans and possibly more than [a
billion](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/more-one-billion-animals-have-been-killed-australias-wildfires-scientist-estimates-180973926/)
animals. And that country, too, was headed by a climate-change denier, a
man who once
[brought](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/feb/09/scott-morrison-brings-coal-to-question-time-what-fresh-idiocy-is-this)
a piece of coal to parliament and handed it around while soothingly
telling other legislators, "Don't be afraid, don't be scared." In
addition, in recent years, the Arctic (of all places) has been [smoking
and
burning](https://www.livescience.com/zombie-wildfires-burn-arctic.html)
in an unprecedented fashion, heating its permafrost and releasing**
**staggering amounts of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Oh, and
this June, the temperature in a small town in Siberia
[crossed](https://www.sciencenews.org/article/climate-new-high-temperature-heat-record-arctic-siberia-context)
the 100-degree mark for the first time.

By the way, Russia, too, is run by a leader who [until
recently](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-09-24/putin-is-finally-worried-about-climate-change)
was a climate denier. I mean, what is it about the urge of so many of us
in such a crisis to support those dedicated to quite literally
destroying this planet as a livable place for\... well, us? (Hey there,
[Jair
Bolsonaro](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/trump-bolsonaro-amazon-fires-climate-change-united-nations_n_5d80eaa7e4b077dcbd64bd42)!)

**Our Very Own Firenado**

An almost unimaginable near-half-century ago on a different planet, I
lived in San Francisco. I can still remember the fog rolling in daily,
even during summer in one of the coolest, breeziest cities around. Not
this year, though. On September 6th, for instance, the temperature there
broke 100 degrees,
"[crushing](https://www.sfgate.com/news/editorspicks/article/Some-spots-in-San-Francisco-could-break-100-15546642.php)"
the previous record for that day. In Berkeley, across the Bay, where I
also once lived long, long ago, it hit 110. As a heat wave swept the
state (and the West), temperatures near Los Angeles soared to a
[record-breaking 121
degrees](https://patch.com/california/los-angeles/los-angeles-hits-121-degrees-countys-hottest-day-ever)
(almost challenging [overheated
Baghdad](https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2020/07/29/baghdad-iraq-heat-record/),
Iraq, this year), while reaching 130 degrees in the aptly named Death
Valley \-- and that's just to start down a list of soaring temperatures
across the West from the Canadian to the Mexican borders. 

As those fires filled the skies with smoke and ash, turning day into the
eeriest of nights, a [smoke
cloud](https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2020/09/12/california-wildfires-smoke-plumes/)
the likes of which had never before been seen appeared over the coastal
West. Meanwhile,
[firenadoes](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/weather/rare-firenado-spotted-california-heat-wave-scorches-state-n1236880)
were spotted and the ash-filled air threatened terrible things for
health. As has been true for the last 46 years, I'm thousands of miles
away from my old Bay Area haunts. Still, I regularly check in with
friends and *TomDispatch *authors on that coast, some aged like me and
locked in their homes lest the smoke and ash, the air from hell, do them
in. Meanwhile, their cars are packed to go, their evacuation checklists
ready. 

My heart goes out to them and, really, to all of us (and, above all, to
those to whom we oldsters will be leaving such a blazing, tumultuous
world).

Sadly, among the endless scandals and horrors of the Trump era, the
greatest one by far scandalized all too few for all too long among those
who officially matter on this beleaguered planet of ours.  Even in 2016,
it should have been obvious enough that a vote for Donald Trump was a
vote for the apocalypse. Give him credit, though. He made no secret of
that fact or that his presidency would be a fossil-fueled nightmare. It
was obvious even then that he, not climate change, was the "hoax" and
that this planet would suffer in unique ways from his (ad)ministrations.

And in every way imaginable, Donald Trump delivered as promised. He\'s
been uniquely fiery and furious. In his own fashion, he's also been a
man of his word. He's already brought "fire and fury" to this country in
so many ways and, if he has anything to say about it, he's just gotten
started.

Don't doubt for a second that, should he be losing on November 3rd (or
beyond, given the mail-in vote to come), he'll declare electoral fraud
and balk at leaving the White House. Don't doubt for a second that he'd
be happy to torch that very building and whatever, at this point, is
left of the American system with it before he saw himself "lose."

Since he is, in his own fashion, a parody of everything: a politician, a
Republican, an autocrat, even a human being, he sums up in some extreme
(if eerily satiric) fashion human efforts to destroy our way of life in
these years. In truth, fiery and furiously fueled, he\'s a historic
cloud of smoke and ash over us all. 

By his very nature, to use those 2017 nuclear words of his, he is
"threatening beyond a normal state." Think of him as the president from
hell and here I mean a literal hell. Four more years of him, his crew,
and the [fossil-fuelized
criminals](https://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175703/tomgram%3A_engelhardt,_the_biggest_criminal_enterprise_in_history/)
running the major oil, gas, and coal companies who are riding his
coattails into profit heaven and planetary misery are the cast of a
play, both comedy and tragedy, that none of us should have to sit
through. He\'s our very own firenado and \-- it's not complicated \--
four more years of him will consign us to a hell on Earth of a sort
still only faintly imaginable today.

*Tom Engelhardt is a co-founder of the *[*American Empire
Project*](http://www.americanempireproject.com/)* and the author of a
history of the Cold War, *[The End of Victory
Culture](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.
He runs *[TomDispatch](https://www.tomdispatch.com/) *and is a fellow of
the Type Media Center. His sixth and latest book is *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

*Follow *TomDispatch* on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)*
and join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new dystopian novel
(the second in the Splinterlands series)
*[Frostlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469484/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
Beverly Gologorsky\'s novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),*
and Tom Engelhardt\'s *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy\'s *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*
and John Dower\'s *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since
World War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*

Copyright 2020 Tom Engelhardt

Thanks to \<a href="[http://tomdispatch.com](http://tomdispatch.com/)"\>TomDispatch.com, \</a\>where this article originally appeared ... without the image.
