![](corona-antro-cover.jpg){class="alarge"}

# The Coronavirus Pandemic \*

### Anthroposophical Perspectives

## by Judith von Halle

Published by Temple Lodge, UK

(Translated from German by Frank Thomas Smith)

Reviewed by John Harris

Judith von Halle has weighed in on one of the most pressing questions of
our times, the COVID-19 Pandemic. She offers her analysis as an
Anthroposophist, but states that her book is not based on strict
spiritual-scientific research, but rather in response to informal
questions asked by her Dornach group, the *Free Association for
Anthroposophy*. This is an important distinction, as Ms von Halle is
known as a seer and stigmatic. However, discussion of her psychic
abilities are not a subject for this review, although readers familiar
with her background will be aware of this context. Still, Judith's
clairvoyant perception does inform her insight. She writess: "..the
answers given do not constitute a final scientific treatise\...Obviously
a methodical spiritual-scientific investigation into the corona virus
phenomenon cannot be accomplished in such a short time."

Understanding the Coronavirus has generated a storm of speculation. A
wide variety of theories about the cause, symptoms, treatment and
ramifications of the disease have created something of an absurdist
struggle to define just what the heck it is! It has become a competition
enlisting all the powers of intellectual and emotional persuasion, with
medical egos vying for superiority. Add to this the horrendous planning
and (lack of) leadership, particularly in America, and pandemics of fear
and social collapse are being spawned together with other disruptive
global events. Conflicts of opinion and conspiracy theories have
escalated to the point where causation and response are being defined by
lies and censorship.

Despite all these disruptions, few doctors or researchers have thought
to seek understanding beyond the confines of their medical belief
systems. In Judith von Halle\'s view, this failure to think outside the
box has obscured what can be seen as a relatively simple concept,
despite the complexity of material details and the dogmatic approach of
medicine and science. "If we are to understand the pandemic we must seek
deeper, spiritual causes. All physical events and manifestations\...
arrive from this spiritual world."  The soul, weakened by a belief
system which excludes spiritual forces, is thus susceptible to the
virus. Materialism has enabled forces, which von Halle identifies as
specific "beings" to influence not only health, but human evolution
itself. While science defines the 'outer' symptoms, the 'inner' effect
is isolation. Spirit is driven out and pathogens can parasitically
infect the body.

Judith warns that humanity is at a 'turning point', if awareness of our
spiritual nature is replaced by the exclusive belief in the primacy of
scientific materialism. The advent of Covid 19 is an indication of this
trend. Materialism must be considered as a cause of of the pandemic. She
traces the source of these causes to the year 1879 and what Rudof
Steiner called "The Fall of the Spirits of Darkness" (GA 177). Judith
von Halle identifies these forces as hierarchical beings, and identifies
one specific being, whose supremacy indicates the mortal threat which
this pandemic represents: the Anti-Christ, also known as Sorat, the
Beast 666. Sorat is the most powerful spiritual enemy to face humanity.
The pandemic is part of Sorat's third attack on mankind, which
originated around 1998. Sorat's first attack occurred around 666 (the
time of The Academy of Gondishpur), and the second attack around 1332
(when the Templars were persecuted) -- all significant spiritual dates,
separated by 666 year intervals. Other hierarchical beings interact with
man's physical and spiritual bodies: the luciferic upon the astral, the
ahrimanic upon the etheric, and the asuric upon the physical body.
However, the 'I', unlike man's temporal bodies, is man's eternal self,
and only Sorat is powerful enough to interact with it.

The author covers many peripheral subjects such as fear, the nature of
blood, bacteria and viruses, the consciousness soul, meditation, social
unrest, economic collapse, and many more. Of particular importance is *
karma* and its causes and ramifications.

The pandemic expresses a unique dynamic, where differing karmic forces
are evident. The normal patterns of reincarnation and the attendant
repercussions become obfuscated by conflicting spiritual currents. This
can even be chaotic for the Hierarchies involved in human evolution,
especially when causation may not have its usual effect. For instance in
a car accident, where individuals are injured or killed, the karma of
the people involved may have a certain logic. The limited number of
people involved can be understood as their individual karma. That they
would all be at that place and time is possible. This is an instance
where individual and group karma can be understood. In a pandemic
individual, group and human karma are all involved. It is a global
event, involving millions of people. In this instance many cases of
individual karma will be supplanted by the forces of group or human
karma. In this sense, the pandemic is similar to other 'natural'
catastrophes and karmas can become chaotic. "After the death of an
affected person whose individual karmic threads are severed by the karma
of humanity, it is not easy for the Hierarchies to weave these threads
back together again.." Thus such karmic events are often mysterious, and
Judith explains this important connection which defines the pandemic. 

Another common question concerns therapeutic treatments, several of
which Judith von Halle examines. With pandemics the controversial
question of vaccines inevitably arises:

> > *Spiritually considered, vaccination campaigns, however beneficial they
may be at first, cannot remedy humanity's karmic adjustment caused by a
viral epidemic. At best a postponement of humanity's karmic adjustment
takes place. If the spiritual causes of the plague are not remedied but
instead comprehensive vaccinations are administered, more drastic
consequences or compensation must be reckoned with in the future. This
is not an appeal against vaccinations. It is only meant to indicate that
vaccination campaigns alone are not a solution, but at most a stop-gap
one, because without the removal of the spiritual causes for the
Infectious illness, they contribute to the eruption of other more
powerful epidemics.*

 

Among her important conclusions is what Judith calls "The Great
Diversionary Maneuver". This is the intent of Sorat and Ahriman to
prevent human awareness of the presence of the Etheric Christ, the most
powerful spiritual impulse in our world today. This cunning maneuver is
largely achieved by distraction from the spiritual causes of the
pandemic and takes advantage of the vulnerabilities which the
material/scientific world concept creates. By rejection of the spirit,
pathogens gain access to human health and consciousness, helping to
conceal awareness of the Etheric Christ while simultaneously promoting
the pandemic.

> > *The  Anthroposophist can easily recognize that nothing pathological
(such as the Coronavirus) ensues from a good divine spirituality. Rather
the existence of life-threatening, or only illness-causing pathogens is
a sign that in the present widespread pandemic, the shiftings and
workings of a sub-sensory spiritual power is misunderstood and therefore
not banished. The discussion about tightening or easing social
restrictions is therefore - justified as it is - missing the point as
long as this essential aspect is not taken into account.*

Judith von Halle explains that the virus must be resisted and not
accepted as just another disease. It needs to be recognized for the
*evil* it intends through the distraction it provides. This is Sorat's
long term strategy of which the pandemic is a precursor.

> > *The coronavirus itself is not the great diversionary maneuver, rather
everything that follows. The attention and forces of millions of people
- as different in opinions and intentions as they may be - are equally
bound to let the central event of our time, which could make us the
legitimate representatives of our time, pass by unnoticed.*

Despite what the author calls the "aphoristic" nature of this book, her
natural intuition shines through. The fact that this volume is not based
on spiritual scientific research makes the text readily approachable.
The dominant theme that emerges repeatedly is Materialism vs
Spirituality. Materialism as the world concept which, by excluding
consciousness of the spiritual realities behind existence, promotes the
activity of pathogens like the coronavirus. These pathogens are the
pawns of materialism, which are being moved by Sorat and his minions in
an effort to blind humanity to the presence of and union with the
Etheric Christ. However, it remains the free choice of the developing
Consciousness Soul whether to accept the spiritual within the 'I'- or to
pursue the illusory gratifications found on the physical plane.
Pandemics are but one element of this cunningly complex strategy, which
extends across countless eons and worlds. Seen in this light, Covid-19
mirrors a greater meaning than the ultimate randomness of the
materialism which has spawned it.

 Although not a medical doctor, Judith von Halle has written two
previous volumes related to the areas of illness and healing, and the
spiritual impulses behind related phenomenon which have been translated
into English: *Dementia* (2015) and *Illness and Healing* (2007)

\*Translated from German by Frank Thomas Smith
