# Coyoacán - Place of Coyotes

![](coyo-2.JPG){class="alarge"}

## By Gaither Stewart



> > > *Broken spears lie in the roads; 
> > > 
> > > We have torn our hair in grief
> > > 
> > > The houses are roofless now, and their walls
> > > 
> > > *are* red with blood.
> > > 
> > > An Aztec poem about the fall of an empire*

1\.

Ethan was sitting at the sidewalk café on the main plaza of Coyoacán
mulling over the implications of his unspoken declaration of
independence from his wife, Guadalupe. The other tables were still
vacant. The daily tropical shower had come and gone. And the sun shining
through a thin veil of mist had turned the trees in the park vis-à-vis
to silver. Something about being alone in the café reminded him of his
youth when he would stand on the city square at the top of the hill
under the shadow of Sunset Mountain and the same feeling of lostness
came over him. He let the remembrance carry him back in the hope of
discovering his original self in his first home; instead, the conceptual
return to that past soured and turned into sadness; there he was only a
blurred ghost on the empty square under the green mountain. Ethan
disliked parting with the past.

Coyoacán. At over two thousand meters altitude the temperature was
perfect. Then, as happened frequently, he had the sensation of being at
the top of the world. He inhaled deeply. And though the air seemed the
essence of purity, he knew the toxic air in this city dominated even the
fleeting illusion of purity.

As every day Ethan squinted in the direction of where Popocatepetl and
Iztaccihuatl were supposed to be. He scanned the horizon in the vain
hope that the curtain of invisible pollution had magically lifted and
revealed the magnificence of the two volcanoes. But not even the vaguest
outline of a mountain was visible. Man-made impurity was greater than
nature itself. And again his insistent memory wandered back to the air
of an ephemeral world apart from Mexico City, a world in the Blue Ridge
Mountains where Mount Mitchel was majestically present which brought
back from his deepest consciousness his father's simple feelings about
nature: to him the mountainous curtain hanging between him and the flat
country where he'd grown up was an obstacle to be overcome, not a
magical geological giant. And so he too, the young Ethan, began to see
the mountains as a wall separating him from the world beyond. But then
after he broke through nature's barricade and saw what lay in the
beyond, he missed the mountains, which once more played a major role in
his life. Oh, if he could only see 'Popo'. The real top of the world
where things would become clear. The great mountain would guide him in
his relations with the world of Guadalupe, here, so far from their home
together in Italy ... and from his original mountain home.

The image of mountains cast the usual tranquility over him while he
observed the approach of the distinguished man with two small children
walking through the park toward the café. Every day the gray-bearded man
came with the children and stood on the other street side under a big
Ash tree and looked toward the café. Mystery hung over the man of about
fifty with the children. Sometimes he treated the children to ices and
they would stand there together under the great Ash tree looking fixedly
toward the café. Though he never crossed the street, the usual café
people knew him. Some would cross the street and speak a moment with the
older man, discretely pressing something into his hand. The man was not
a beggar and no one treated him as such. So Ethan had begun doing the
same. Since he was still the only one at the café today he would chat a
bit with the man he'd decided was a former university professor or had
perhaps played a French horn in the city's symphony orchestra, and was
now down on his luck.

Ethan bought ices for the children and he and the professor sat on bench
near the Coyotes Fountain and talked about Popocatepetl.

"But Professor, if Popo is invisible and no one can climb it, does the
mountain really exist?" Looking in the direction of the mountains the
idea again occurred to him that the end of time lay inside the toxic
veil concealing Popocatepetl.

The man looked perplexed, then said in an erudite manner that he was not
really a professor and that of course Popocatepetl existed. "It and its
companion volcanoes, Iztaccihuatl and La Malinche, are always there. The
Aztecs worshiped them like gods."

"Worshiped mountains, Professor? Well, some people worshiped the
mountains where I came from too ... but not my father."

The other stroked the head of the little girl and wiped clean the boy's
chin.

"Your children?" Ethan asked.

"My grandchildren. Their mother died of pneumonia, the father vanished
into Bidonville."

"Oh, how sad. Bidonville must be hell."

"Who knows? No matter. Anyway, Popocatepetl means Smoking Mountain and
Iztaccihuatl, the White Woman. According to an Aztec legend they were
once man and woman, deeply in love and were transformed into volcanic
mountains. The third and less important mountain is La Malinche---named
for an infamous woman who betrayed her people and became the mistress of
Cortés the conquistador. The worst thing you can call a woman here is
Malinche."

"Please tell me about it ... by the way were you a professor of
history?"

"If you insist. Maybe yes, maybe no. Some things you know, other things
you can only guess. Like the unicorn for example. I believe it exists.
Anyway, I can tell you some things. First of all I assure you that
Popocatepetl exists even though we cannot see it or climb it as Fidel
and Che once did. As we know in this scientific age of atoms and
viruses, invisibility does not mean non-existence ... as only
simple-minded persons may think. Eruptions are eruptions. They happen.
The most recent was last January. They too exist... like the diseases
the Spanish brought that killed the natives.

"In 1519 the Spanish conquerors arrived and erased the ancient Aztec
culture that had passed its zenith. Moctezoma and his predecessors had
ruled with Dostoevsky's three essential earthly forces: miracles,
secrecy and rigid authority. Lacking however was the spontaneity of
freedom, so that after centuries cracks had begun showing in its
structure. When the Spaniards arrived its civilization was already
crumbling. And Spanish victors then wrote the history that became the
truth for all time \... a history that paints the dreamy Aztec
civilization as mere myth in the Mexican pantheon."

"Well, the Spaniards' version has lasted. And that veil of fairytale and
unreality still shrouds Western history of the Spanish conquest of what
they found here."

"Yes, but solid Aztec sources tell another story of the conquest: on the
one hand, the breakdown of the Aztec network of uncertain alliances with
the weaker peoples in its empire and on the other, a creeping rottenness
in Aztecisn, by then a faith. But even though disintegrating at the
roots, it was still an empire. Transitory in the passage of history, but
an empire. Moreover, total misunderstandings marked the ambivalent
relations between the Spanish imperialists and the quixotic Aztecs who
believed they could dominate the strange foreigners by a show of power
... and the usual bribery. But the Aztecs never understood that those
men who didn't paint their bodies and wore armor were there to kill,
conquer and loot Aztec gold. Men who sat atop four-legged beasts. Men
who took Aztec diplomatic gifts as weakness and killed the messengers.
Men who had no honor and slaughtered women and children and destroyed
whole villages. Men who had no city of their own so they had to take the
sacred city of Tenochtitlan \..."

"They sound like my fellow countrymen!"

"Well, yes, the analogies are numerous. Anyway, though the Aztecs drove
the Spaniards from the city the first time, smallpox---invisible to the
visionary Aztecs---broke out and masses of people in Tenochtitlan died
from disease and starvation. Before the year was out the Spanish rallied
their forces here in Coyoacán and put Tenochtitlan under siege. Aztec
subject peoples joined the Spanish foreigners to crush the Aztecs in
their city of gold. Against all odds the Aztecs resisted so that the
Spanish leveled the city with their cannons. And instead of a city of
gold Spain took a city of rubble and the dead. The Aztec empire fell and
its leader Moctezoma pulled down a nebulous civilization and its magical
city with him. So has been the ultimate fate of world empires."

"Professor, you have portrayed perfectly our shifting world today."

"Oh, that is neither here nor there."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean to say that it is a supreme example of the follies of mankind.
But look what happened to our Mexico. We have never again counted. Not
since the time of Tenochtitlan has Mexico mattered. The Mexican-American
war was a war of America against a fragile and weary Mexico. The monster
of this city we live in took the sacred city's place. Poor Mexicans hung
onto their old gods and today put together their ramshackle Bidonville
while the rich white Spaniards live in great *palacios* and still crush
the poor without ever having seen them. Gibbons wrote that 'Such is the
constitution of civil society, that whilst a few persons are
distinguished by riches, by honors, and by knowledge, the body of the
people is condemned to obscurity, ignorance and poverty. In *The Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire* he wrote: 'A long period of distress and
anarchy, in which empire, and arts, and riches had migrated from the
banks of the Tiber was incapable of restoring or adorning the city; and,
as all that is human must retrograde if it does not advance, every
successive age must have hastened the ruin of the works of antiquity.'"

"Professor, you know my homeland well."

"Alas, I truly do. The old saying about Mexico's ills still holds:
*Pobre Mexico tan lejos de dios y tan cerca de los Estados Unidos. *Poor
Mexico, so far from God and so near the United States. In Old Mexico,
the *past* is the future. Progress is a return to the pre-Aztec past.
For Mexicans, the Golden Age is in the remote past before capitalist
Yankees tried to take their lands. Utopia means a return to the original
time of ancient civilizations. Yet if Mexico like Popocatepetl is
invisible to much of the world, we are still here and Mexico exists."
[]{#anchor}

"Well, though the empire fell, it seems Aztecism remains. The Spanish
world empire fell too, but imperialism remains. We keep repeating the
same mistakes."

"The things of man are indeed fragile. The Aztecs are gone but their
sacred Popocatepetl remains, roaring and blasting its lava to warn us,
and we can't even see it ... it has its lava but we have our pollution."

Ethan pressed an envelope into the other's hands. "Something nice for
the children," he said. "Uh, Professor, I just got the idea of looking
for your son-in-law in Bidonville. Maybe he needs help. What's his
name?"

"He's called Juan Carlos Morelos. About thirty-five by now. Looks older,
I'm sure. Sickly type. Tall and skinny."

"I hope to see you again tomorrow, Sir."

"Tomorrow as every day. Coming here is our job," he said with an
embarrassed smile. Little children already working! It's shameful.\"

"Maybe I've found a job too."

2\.

Ethan's taxi zigzagged through a web of streets, entered a
traffic-packed avenue and pulled to the side in front of a block of
structures covered in Coca Cola placards. Behind them spread rows of tin
and cardboard shacks, each different in shape and material. One was
painted pink, another ecologically green. This was it. Bidonville,
Mexico City.

As night descended over Mexico City, Ethan entered an alley and stepped
inside Bidonville. And a sudden blackness fell over the world. He
stumbled through the darkness searching for a light. Ankle deep in slime
and overpowered by the stench, he suddenly felt free. Freer here than in
Coyoacán. He seemed to see himself. You need this kind freedom to find
yourself, he thought. You need the courage to accept your freedom when
you find it. If not, you feel death. He felt giddy. This was the total
isolation from Guadalupe he'd needed. He felt like a hermit must feel.
Still, he thought, it takes as much courage to be a hermit as to be,
say, a heretic. Surrounded by European ghosts, he felt he was on the
right path, maybe dangerous but the right one. Bidonville, in one of the
world's biggest cities. If I'm not careful my own mind and body and soul
will transform into a Bidonville. In that moment he saw far down the
alley a flickering of light.

Hesitantly he entered the shack. Candles were spaced around a big room.
Mud from the earlier rain seeped inside. Mosquitoes buzzed around his
head. Out of the shadows a young man stepped forward.

"Hola, I'm Marcos. I'm helping out here." Ethan's eyes swept around the
room. Layers of cardboard covered the earthen floor. Along the tin
walls, crates of milk, dried foods, labeled bags and stacks of big blue
bottles of drinking water. A cot and red blankets.

"Donations," Marcos said. The man in his middle twenties was white,
European-looking, well-spoken, wearing mud-caked pants. "But never
enough for the thousands of people here."

"Did the city send you out here?"

"The city? Mexico City doesn't know Bidonville even exists. That is, it
knows ... but it doesn't know. The rich just get richer and never look
this way. The good bourgeoisie doesn't want to know of the existence of
this other city. A parallel city, but invisible to the others.
Bidonville City exists only because TV reporters film it from
helicopters. And because police raid it every time there is a
drug-related killing in the area."

"Are there really drug gangs here?"

"People here are more likely victims than pushers. Say, you're not
police, are you? You don't have that look. But drug cartels and their
pushers? No, I don't think so. Anyway, can I help you?"

"I'm looking for the father of some small children I know. His name is
Juan Carlos Morelos. About thirty-five, tall and thin and sickly."

"Everybody here looks sickly. But not many tall and thin men. Most squat
and tiny. But wait a minute! We'll see."

From the opening, Marcos whistled sharply. A few minutes later two dark
brown boys of eleven or twelve ran up the alley. Marcos confabulated a
minute or two with them.

"My intelligence organization," he said. "If Juan Carlos is here,
they'll find him."

"Maybe you need some help here. I can contribute some supplies."

"You want to help? Nobody dares even enter here. But of course, you're
..." A tall shadow dressed in baggy dirty brown pants and shirt suddenly
filled the entrance way.

"I'm Morelos," he said, eyeing Ethan suspiciously.

It happened so fast that Ethan said simply: "I know your children. They
need you."

"I have no children. I have no one ... not in this world."

"You have Nella and you have Juanito, a father-in-law, and now you have
me. You have more people in this world than I do. I only want to climb
Popocatepetl. Breathe some good air. All of us need it."

The man stared at Ethan as if he were *loco como una cabra*. Dressed
like a foreigner, visiting him in this hell hole and wants to go
mountain climbing, he had to be crazy as hell.

"I couldn't take care of them. My wife, Laurita ... she died. She was
real life. I had a job in our home ... in Puebla. We had our children.
The dirt, the dust, she got sick. With her gone, I began dying too. *Los
niños* are better with Laurita's *padre*."

"Oh, he loves them. Everyone in Coyoacán loves them. But children need
their father ...."

"Oh God, look at that!" Ethan exclaimed pointing toward a huge rat
sitting on its haunches near the sacks looking at them with glistening
eyes. "It's as big as a cat."

"Oh, that's Caesar," Marcos said picking up an iron rod and moving
toward the beast. "No cats in Bidonville. The rats eat them too. Caesar
thinks he lives here. I leave grain on a plate for him so he doesn't
attack the sacks of corn meal." When the rat saw the rod, he watched for
a moment as if to determine if Marcos meant business, then judiciously
scampered toward them, passed just next to Juan Carlos and out the door.

All three of them then winced at the sudden whining of sirens. Red and
yellow lights of police cars swept over the swamp of Bidonville where
dark falls earlier than elsewhere. Leapfrogging searchlights from a
helicopter swept up and down the flooded alleys separating the irregular
rows of sheds and lean-tos and inundated the room with distorted pale
shapes. They heard the police cars ramming random shacks. At each thud
of metal against cardboard and tin, Marcos and Juan Carlos shuddered,
waiting for the crumbling sound of another structure collapsing over
someone's head. People splashed down the alleys of the unmeasured
sprawl.

"Lots of action today! Still, Bidonville is forever fugitive," a
depressed Marcos said, sitting down on a bench along a wall, his hands
hanging between his legs. "It expands and shrinks like a dirty giant
accordion according to the season and police interventions. Garbage and
excrement bob on the black waters in the alleys steeped in slime. Mud
crawls everywhere, cold and sticky at night, stinking and fly-infested
during the day. Mud seeps under my cardboard door that I prop up at
night. But it's an uneven battle against the filth. Living here inside
the reality of Bidonville, I fear I also forget real pity. Nobody pities
anybody here."

Ethan kept slapping at mosquitoes buzzing in his ears, nose and mouth
despite the spirals burning in each corner. Juan Carlos stood near the
entrance, expressionless as if he didn't count. Marcos rambled:
"Bidonville inhabitants get used to the mosquitoes and the smells but
because of the dampness and the night chill at this altitude many are
bronchitic or tubercular. Actually police invasions are not frequent.
From here it's hard to imagine that you are in gigantic Mexico City \...
that you really exist. Here inside the labyrinth, reality is illusory.

"It's not the noise and chaos of Mexico that's remarkable here: it's the
quiet. Nights you can hear the grunts in the darkness of human beings
making love. Early today an anonymous tip signaled two bodies dumped in
a ditch inside the perimeter of Bidonville. A police journalist told me
drug lords had assassinated two rival dealers. So police are imparting a
lesson to Bidonville as if it were responsible.

"Bidonville is the bottom of the world. The rejects of the visible world
gather here. But it's an invisible world. Its inhabitants are invisible
... or they exist only in their dreams. Though they might dream of a
better life, day-by-day real life slips through their fingers. When I
walk in the dark alleyways here, I flick my flashlight to scare away the
very visible rats. Yet, though most people here are poor in imagination
of a better life, a few are rich in a kind of innate brilliance. A few
make it!"

Ethan and Juan Carlos taxied back to Coyoacán. New clothes and a shower
in Ethan's quarters, and Juan Carlos was a new man. Dressed in khaki and
with clean black hair, though extremely pale there was something special
about him. Curiosity had reawakened in his black eyes. Ethan decided
Juan was a descendant of the Toltecs. Known for their immaculate ways,
their wisdom, the clarity of their speech, Toltec peoples were artistic
and great warriors. Bidonville had nearly eradicated those innate
characteristics but the real Juan was reviving. Maybe, Ethan thought,
he's destined to be a great writer ... or a realist painter.

Juan's curious eyes swept over the café on the plaza. For the first time
he was meeting the West. Ethan saw in the scene confirmation that Mexico
is Western ... and it is not. In Mexico City you see Western
civilization. But in the dances of the Concheros on Plaza Mayor he'd
seen reflections of the other Mexico to which Juan Carlos belonged.
Though the indigenous people are numerous, nearly all speak Spanish.
Mexico is a country between two civilizations---one Western, the other
indigenous---and between two pasts---one Spanish and the other
pre-Hispanic. In his *El Laberinto de la Soledad, *Octavio Paz writes
that just as behind the Greeks stood the Egyptians or behind the Romans
stood the Etruscans, behind the Aztecs and the Spanish conquerors that
formed today's Mexicans there stand millennia of peoples in a long and
dizzying past. Mexico is different. People on this plateau have always
been different. Aztecs emphasized their otherness---in their language
and dress, and in their strange culture including human sacrifice.
Ghoulish priests covered in blood cutting out human hearts on the
killing stones at the top of their pyramids. They *wanted* to be
different. Spartan people, they considered others inferior, stupid and
comical.

"We'll be here tomorrow when your children and father-in-law come,"
Ethan promised. Juan smiled when Ethan added: "They always stand just
across the street under that Ash tree."

3\.

Lermontov wrote of flowers which the more you look after them, the less
they respond to your efforts. Such had become Ethan's relationship with
his wife, Guadalupe. The more he loved her, the less she responded to
his love. He had given up his old way of life and moved to her country
to care for the woman he loved, leaving his job in Europe and accepting
the minor role in their relationship. His new role in his still
undetermined life was dedicated to his "Lupe".

In their early years together in Italy, beautiful Guadalupe with her
long dark hair was angelic. But back in her homeland she had acquired
the bewildering capacity to transform into a demon. Maybe it had to do
with the ancient history of the Mexico City suburb where they lived.
Coyoacán---place of the coyotes---built on the site of a pre-Colombian
settlement from which the Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés launched
that final attack on Tenochtitlan. The dream city fell and is now named
Mexico City.

Ethan loved Coyoacán. And he loved Guadalupe. He loved walking by Frida
Kahlo's Blue House just around the corner from the café. Life's
satisfactions were no longer measured according to the same standards
he'd known before. Life seemed to have reached a higher plane, even
though he sensed that its finest qualities still escaped him. In any
case, position and influence no longer existed. But he had his extended
family to care for: Juan Carlos, two small children and their
grandfather. Still, his life in this new Old World was frustrating and
Guadalupe was no longer the loving woman she'd once been.

He was truly puzzled. It seemed less a question of place than he'd
thought---whether in Italy where they'd lived, or here in her family
house in the historic center of Coyoacán---but of the length of their
time together and their proximity one to the other. And he recalled the
old adage: 'familiarity breeds contempt.'

Ethan's existential situation was peculiar. He spoke the language but
the country where he'd re-settled was a hazy unknown. He'd always spoken
Spanish with Lupe and he'd been here with her on visits. But visits were
one thing, permanent residence another. It was strange to hear what in
Italy had been their somewhat secret language spoken everywhere.

Even the flight from Europe to Mexico several months earlier was
different ... this time a one-way trip. Ethan had perceived the approach
to the triangle of Mexico as a metaphysical happening. After overflying
the Rio Grande the earthen mass below rose upwards toward the heavens.
Mountainous ridges swelled and tumbled forward from western skies like
huge oceanic waves. And his past too skipped away across spinning
gossamer clouds. Invisible worlds zoomed around him. Mexico narrowed and
the sky retreated heavenwards. And the bluish mountains filling the
triangular plateau called Mesoamerica formed a gigantic pyramid
surrounded by the seas. It was the top of the world where time stood
still. He'd felt a sensation of dizzying power and the mystery of the
unknown.

Ethan too had wanted the move. It was time to go beyond Italy, beyond
Europe. He thought moving to Mexico must be like going to war used to be
for young men---escape from the dead-end-you of home when your hopes
begin to decline and your dreams fade and you are ready to do almost
anything to survive. He'd thought of their move as a move toward a new
form of sanity in a disordered world, an attempt to get a handle on his
life. To acquire a generalized awareness. But that, he now realized, was
utopian thinking ... in a way more terrible than his usual
out-of-tuneness and solitude.

For his survival in this new life he had to change his whole existence.
Undertake something new. Reestablish a healthy spatial distance between
Guadalupe and himself as his work had done in Italy. A buffer zone could
save them. He had to isolate a block of time and space for himself. A
time during which he could become a separate entity, independent of Lupe
and her world.

So he'd set about creating his space. He now had a lost Toltec in his
charge. He had another family that needed him. But he still suffered
disorientation. And anxiety. He felt strange new impulses like his
fixation on Popcatepetl. He knew that in every couple one loved more
than the other. And since he was the one whose love---and
dependence---was the greater, he suffered more from the widening
distance between them. She had her world; he still had to construct his.
Missing in his lonely world was a genuine passion that was not
Guadalupe.

Marcos in Bidonville had said that people in one district of this city
never knew what people in other parts were doing---twenty-five million
people? Thirty million? No one knew. A mystery. The city's immensity
truly merited a gigantic volcanic mountain with the fitting name of
Popocatepetl or Smoking Mountain even if it remained hidden from view.
Shy today, one day Popo will reveal itself.

An experienced urban walker, Ethan decided to plot this gigantic
city---his new space. A challenging venture. He saw that people of
suburban Coyoacán thought of the center of the Old City at Plaza Mayor
as a foreign country. People in western parts of the city knew nothing
of the eastern districts. Some days he just wandered around the city too
huge to see whole. Mexico City-Tenochtitlan was visible ... but not as a
whole. Its peoples---battling traffic, assuring personal security, drunk
on weekends and fighting for physical survival---showed no signs of
knowing what life was about. The great Valley of Mexico seemed like the
final stage of the madness of civilized man, Aztecan Tenochtitlan was
suspended between the rich West and the Fourth World. He would unite
this disunited city ... conceptually: he set out to walk the length of
*Insurgentes*, the great avenue that formed a 28.8 kilometer long
north-south axis dividing the city into two halves like Broadway in
Manhattan. Plodding northwards through the heavy mists: kilometers of
slim colored glass skyscrapers, the vanguard of modernity even though
Mexico itself was still a political caveman ... a capitalist
semi-dictatorship based on corruption and retention of power.
Underpasses and traffic circles, carbon monoxide and incessant traffic.
The white marble of the Bellas Artes Museum didn't ameliorate the
pollution or reduce the infernal noise or calm Mexico's dust. Nor did
the dainty delicacies of Sanborn's restaurants or Starbucks or Burger
King or the revolutionary murals of David Siquieros, Diego Rivera and
Clemente Orozco make the water potable. The delightful spring
temperatures didn't freshen smog-filled throats. And the blasé rich in
Zona Rosa restaurants ignored the withered women on the streets
rationing tortillas to tiny children.

But somehow, Ethan thought, Mexico is not decadent as were the Aztecs at
the time the Spanish arrived. Mexico can rise again. It's a viable
society of young ambitious people, a country on its way up.

At one point on Insurgentes Nord he was half singing, half reciting
'*Round like a circle in a spiral, like a wheel within a wheel Never
ending or beginning on an ever spinning reel, Like a tunnel that you
follow to a tunnel of its own.... *when he heard jazz from a bar
identified as Bar Americano. He stopped at the wide open window and
heard another music from the past: Dave Brubeck. He hummed along to the
end. The radio DJ announced they'd just heard *Poor Butterfly* ... and
then translated the title as *Pobre Mariposa*. Ethan thought *Poor
Butterfly* was more romantically melancholy. He added the Bar Americano
and the song titles to his notes where he listed names of streets and
buildings and bus stations and museums and restaurants, accumulating a
mass of unrelated raw data ... but he never succeeded in linking in his
mind the countless divisions of the city. Never reached the north end of
the *avenida. *

4\.

Juan Carlos moved into the apartment with his children and
father-in-law, Victor Ibarra Villalobos. It was the first floor of a
two-story house near the Frida Kahlo Blue House Museum, an apartment
that a Coyoacán social organization had awarded him years earlier for
unspecified outstanding services to the community. Ethan still called
Victor "Professor", who although he never acknowledged that he was once
a history professor, he knew a lot about many things ranging from
ancient Mexico to the socio-political sciences.

Victor Ibarra's contacts among the café crowd succeeded in creating the
position of gardener of the communal park opposite the café for Juan
Carlos. And there soon appeared posters and signs around the Coyoacán
center announcing upcoming lectures by Professor Victor Ibarra
Villalobos in the township auditorium.

"Well!", Ethan exclaimed, suppressing a mild reproof of Victor's
reticence about his background. "Who are you?"

"It's complicated," Victor said softly, and spreading his hands as if in
regret of a whole life ... but without further explanations of his
cryptic words. "We'll see after the two talks I will present."

"We'll see what?"

"We'll see where we go from here."

Ethan's relations with both Victor and Juan Carlos were close, their
house his second home. When he came the children danced around him in
expectation of the red and green ices he brought and they called him
*Tio Etan*. And Juan Carlos always said: "*Mi casa es tu casa.*

Victor's public lectures were sensational events among the people of
Coyoacán. The auditorium was packed. Juan Carlos, Juanito, Nella and
Ethan had the best seats in the front row together with communal
dignitaries, academics and intellectuals eager to hear Professor
Ibarra's well-known lessons again. Ethan gradually became aware of a
certain nostalgia pervading the front rows as if for the return from
exile of a prodigal son. People were unusually attentive and little
chatter was heard before Professor Ibarra stepped from the wings,
greeted by a ripple of a hesitant applause.

Ethan was still mystified. Where had Victor been? What had he done to
alienate himself for perhaps years?

"I will begin at the end," were Victor's first words at which someone
just behind Ethan said softly: "Hurrah!" "But first I extend my
gratitude to those true friends who made this my, umm, my return
possible. You know who you are as do I.

"This evening however I have decided to risk all---again---and send an
oral message to Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador, Mexico's President.
'Despite many warnings---including mine---Amlo, as we call you, you made
the pilgrimage to Washington and signed also in my name a meaningless
trade pact. The first step toward another surrender. I warned you, dear
President, many times: Do not go, Amlo. But you went. Do not go, Amlo, I
warned. Do not drink the Kool Aid, Amlo. Do not eat the forbidden fruit,
Amlo. But you went and drank and ate. Do not let yourself be branded
with the mark of the beast, Amlo. But you did. And you are now branded,
Amlo. Therefore the curse will now pour upon us Mexicans. Accursed by
the Spanish, now accursed again and again and again by the Yankees. Doom
hangs heavy over us. When the empire of all empires in Washington falls,
so will our beloved Mexico fall, again.'

"Dear friends I cannot help but think of Tezcatlipoca that terrible
eagle god of ancient Mexicans who is still alive for many of us. God of
the gods, the unpredictable god of human destiny, who continually erupts
in the lives of his creations. In his obsidian mirror Tezcatlipoca sees
dreamlike images of the deeds of men on earth and obscure visions of
future events. Like Yahweh, capricious Tezcatlipoca praises men one
moment and punishes them the next. He makes life on earth a dream, and
then from another dream creates another life. In the mad god's vision
we're fleeting and insignificant.

"The Norteamericanos are today a vanishing people. An egotistic and
narcissist people. But our history shows that we Mexicans are a
universal people. On the other hand the reality of Mexican destiny makes
you wonder if it's positive to be so universal that you can accept
*anything* philosophically. For no more than has its toxic proximity to
the USA, universality has not brought great fortune to Mexico. It seems
that only the most ancient peoples are capable of being simply men. Men
who don't strive for perfection and just lead good lives are universal
without realizing it. It makes them free ... but at the same time
vulnerable to the claws of the hawks."

5.

Professor Ibarra's two speeches stirred up considerable talk among the
café people. He still came each afternoon, now to the café itself, as a
rule with Ethan or the guest of one or another. An "Ibarra circle" was
forming. There was an aura of mystery about him. Many words

were spoken about Amlo's Washington trip and the expected long-range
ramifications on Mexico itself. The border wall was still on people's
minds, which the more cynical believed Mexico would end up paying for.
According to some of the café crowd Lopez Obrador had detailed reports
on Ibarra's dire forecasts for the homeland. Ethan was surprised to
learn that Ibarra and the President were former "comrades". Yet, while
Ibarra vanished into oblivion Lopez Obrador went on to become the leader
of the national center-left party and now President of the Republic.

One day as they sat in the café together chatting about one thing or the
other Ethan realized that he had begun imitating Professor Ibarra. So
elegant in spirit and movement, Ibarra had a way of sitting so composed
and self-assured reflecting the unusual qualities that Ethan aspired to.
When Ethan told him about the song *Poor Butterfly* he'd heard on
Avenida Insurgentes, the Professor said that the song goes far back and
that he too preferred the English title.

"The song writer had a real duende that you don't hear in the title
*Pobre Mariposa.*"

Ethan stared at him in surprise. "Is there anything you don't know?" he
asked, truly flabbergasted.

"I've lived a full life ... in many places. What can you expect?"

For a change they were drinking mojitos. Victor lifted his glass and
murmured, "a remembrance of times past."

When Ethan asked which times, Victor told him all: "My father, Manuel
Ibarra, was a leader of the student protests in 1968 against the huge
sums spent on the Olympic Games that year in Mexico while its people
lived in poverty. He penned the slogan *No queremos Olimpiadas, queremos
revolución*. When the army opened fire on the ten thousand students
gathered on La Plaza de las Tres Culturas, they killed hundreds of
students including my father. The army stacked the bodies for all to see
on the square, over a thousand, some said. Their only crime was
agitation. I grew up with that memory. When I spoke about it in
elections decades later against the same corrupt political system, they
exiled me. I went to Cuba. Then to France and finally to the USA. And
now I'm back! All of that is packed in my message to President Lopez
Obrador ... our dear Amlo."

"Victor, er, Professor Ibarra," Ethan exclaimed, "you should be the
President of this country yourself."

"Oh, so you *have* heard. In fact, a new Coyoacán Electoral Committee
has been created and its most influential members want to propose my
candidacy to the Party secretariat. Apparently I have the right skin
color," he chuckled. "Neither Spanish white nor indigenous brown. I'm
the politically correct color. I have accepted in principle. So it's now
uphill work full-time."

Weeks passed and Victor was mostly absent. October was ending. The mists
grew heavier, nuanced, unreadable, taking at times eerie shades of
yellow and green. Every day Ethan checked the skies with ever lessening
optimism for a visible sign of the presence of Popocatepetl. One evening
he and Juan Carlos were sipping Coronas at the café when Ethan again
proposed a hike up the trails of the Smoking Mountain. "You have
holidays next week. Let's go now. Winter will soon arrive."

"Popo is closed to hikers. Too dangerous. Eruptions are still predicted.
You know that story."

"Juan Carlos, you lived in Puebla, practically under Popo so you must
know the secret trails ... the uncontrolled ones. The crater is 5,426
meters high. The map shows we can drive to the Paso de Cortes and on to
Tlamacas at about 3,000 meters. If we hear any rumbles we can just drive
away. Hikers' guides calculate it's only a six-hour walk to the top.
Think about it, Juan, the top of the world! And we'll know it's really
there."

"Oh, it's there, Ethan. I've been there. It's there. But it's forbidden.
Why don't you just go with an organized tourist group."

"What! Me, on a tourist jaunt! Anyway it's not only to make sure
Popocatepetl is there. Listen, Juan Carlos, *amigo mio*. I've just got
to get to the top of the world. I have to. Just one time. Then we can
get busy and help your father-law get back on the political ladder ...
and become the President of Mexico. You know he is already a candidate.
President of Mexico, Juan Carlos! President!"

"They organize hikes in Puebla too," Juan Carlos added weakly. "It's the
easiest. Uh, is Victor really a candidate?"

"Yes, but they won't go up Popocatepetl. It's forbidden. And yes, Victor
Ibarra is the candidate of the Coyoacán Presidential Committee."

"Yes, forbidden. But they will take you up Iztaccihuatl and you can see
Popo perfectly."

"And also La Malinche. But that's not the same thing, you know that,
Juan Carlos. Not the same thing at all."

"No, *de acuerdo*, that's not the same thing."

"You have to understand that it's not only to make sure it's there.
Listen, my friend, you've been there. Maybe many times. You're a Toltec.
You know many things. Maybe you know what the top of the world is like.
Now I have to know too. I've just got to get to the top of the world. I
have to. Just one time. Victor will maybe become President but I have to
see the top. "

"No, looking at Popocatepetl from Iztaccihuatl or Malinche is not the
same as climbing Popo," Juan Carlos repeated.

Ethan looked at his friend closely. It was hard to remember that only a
few months ago he'd been withering away in Bidonville. Now he was nearly
convinced to go with him on this mad mountain climbing jaunt.

"Ok," Ethan said. "You go as far as Tlamacas. Then I'll walk to the top
alone. I don't mind going to the top of the world alone. Not at all."

Ethan turned and waved at the Toltec standing now with his hands on his
hips and a false smile on his pale narrow face. Juan Carlos lifted one
arm in a weak salute and sat back down on the straight chair in front of
the abandoned lodge. Ethan knew he would sit there to await his return
in the tranquil immobility of which only ancient peoples are capable. He
believed Juan Carlos had finally understood that it was a matter of
existential significance: he understood that Ethan had to go to the top.

Ethan looked upwards: the dense pine forest was pleasant like a cool
appetizer at lunchtime on a hot day in the Rome countryside. He zipped
up the light sweater he'd started with. The traces of the trail worn by
many feet before him were nearly erased by liberated vegetation and gray
ash. He thought that even when the trail finally became invisible it
would still exist and in some future would re-live and carry others to
the top of the world.

When the trees began thinning, he felt a pleasant chill despite the
exertion of the climb. When he passed the last trees of the timberline,
vast Alpine meadows opened before him. And when he stopped for his first
unobstructed view of Popocatepetl, he felt a slight tremor and heard the
low intensity explosion above him. Aggressively though reverently he
accelerated his pace upwards across the meadows. He smiled at the plumes
of ash. The earth moved under his feet. The whole world was in movement.
He was higher than five thousand meters. Much higher. He no longer felt
the cold. He put on another sweater and a skull cap anyway. He looked up
at the summit and felt ash falling on his shoulders. It was the ecstasy
of the heretic singing glory to God while burning at the stake that made
him insensitive to fatigue and pain. Subsequent explosions and smoke
plumes only excited him more. He had reached the summit of the world; It
justified, and destroyed, his life.
