# The Impostor Magi

[Español](fts-reyes-impostores.html)

![](3-kings-2.jpg){class="a"}

## by **Frank Thomas Smith**

A boy from the village ran into our yard at lunchtime on the fifth
of January and announced at the top of his lungs that the Three
Kings were coming to the schoolhouse that night at nine o’clock.
That’s how news in Las Chacras is announced – by word of mouth. I
remembered that a neighbor had asked for a donation to buy sweets
and balloons a few days before. Making enquiries on the main road,
I found out that the Kings were scheduled to begin their descent
to the school from the almacén at nine o’clock, which meant that
they would more likely begin at nine-thirty and arrive at ten.  
  
My wife, twelve-year-old son and I left the house at nine-thirty
for the fifteen minute walk to the one-room schoolhouse. We
carried flashlights to light our way down the narrow dirt road.
Although we know the road well, it is advisable not to walk
without light in order to avoid the unpleasant surprise of
stepping on a snake – poisonous or not – or a scorpion. My son is
too old to believe that the Three Kings were coming to Las
Chacras, but he wasn’t adverse to receiving a bag of sweets and
witnessing the spectacle. It was a beautiful starlit evening,
luckily not too warm.  
  
“Look! There’s the Southern Cross,” Nico exclaimed suddenly as we
approached the small clearing marking the entrance to our nearest
neighbor’s house.”  
  
“I don’t think so,” my wife said. “It looks too big to be the
Cross.”  
  
“Yes, it is,” I said. “The size depends on what time of night you
see it.” I wasn’t sure of the accuracy of this affirmation, but
didn’t want to disappoint Nico.  
  
At the main road, also unpaved, a good portion of Las Chacras’s
population of two hundred and fifty, at last unofficial census,
was waiting in front of the brightly lit schoolhouse for the Three
Kings to arrive. The children’s excitement and chattering charged
the air. We switched off our flashlights and exchanged greetings
with those closest to us on the road – and waited. At ten-fifteen
Nico said, in English: “Well, are they coming or not?”  
  
At age ten, Nico, born and bred in Argentina, had discovered that
he understood English and began to speak it. In two years time he
was speaking English fluently, even reads Edgar Allan Poe and The
New Yorker. I consider this a noteworthy accomplishment because,
although I am an American and my Argentine wife speaks fluent
English, we are, after all, in Argentina and mostly speak Spanish
at home. Credit therefore must go to the Beatles ballads Nico
loves to listen to on CDs, computer games and dish TV with its
“Friends” and the New York Mets baseball games. When we lived in
Buenos Aires we didn’t even have a TV, but here in the country
where the nearest cinema is over a hundred miles away and the
cultural life of Buenos Aires six hundred, we have become victims
of technology. So now Nico speaks only English to me, even when
other people are present who don’t understand him, including when
shopping, walking down the street of the nearest real town, Villa
de las Rosas, or in school when I pick him up. Although this is
probably unconscious it is nevertheless impolite. More important,
however, is that I don’t like advertising that we are gringos in a
place where North Americans are generally considered responsible
for most of the world’s ills. I have nothing to do with the IMF,
the World Bank, the Pentagon or the CIA and I definitely wouldn’t
have voted for Bush, but do they know that?  
  
I reminded Nico that punctuality was not one of Las Chacras’
virtues and told him to be patient. Neither Nico nor I are very
patient people, however, and we both walked up and down or around
like first fathers in a maternity ward while my wife chatted with
some women.  
  
The rumor, having filtered through the crowd, finally reached us.
Villa de las Rosas was also sending Three Kings to the
schoolhouse. Some smirked, some laughed outright, as did I, and
others merely frowned upon hearing the news. This requires some
explaining.  
  
Villa de las Rosas is a town of three thousand souls and is an
incorporated municipality. Las Chacras, a mile and a half from Las
Rosas, is a rural community without any official status. Las Rosas
possesses, besides the City Hall, a police station, a post office,
a service station, several restaurants, a primary and a high
school, and an inn. Las Chacras has none of these, only the
one-room school and an almacén-taberna, or grocery store cum bar.
The one thing we have in abundance that Las Rosas lacks, in
abundance, is water. And this commodity is worth more than all the
service stations and city halls this side of the sierras. The
water that serves Las Rosas comes from a dam a few miles away, and
when the artificial lake is low the water pressure is
insufficient. Las Chacras gets its water from mountain springs
that would be pure if it weren’t for the animals up high that
defecate in the streams. But by the time it gets to us it’s good
enough for the residents, who develop antibodies to whatever
bacteria is left over. Tourists could have a problem, so nobody
tells them, and usually they don’t.  
  
There are a lot more voters in Las Rosas though, and all are
screaming for more water. The mayor and his cohorts therefore
think – if you can call it thinking – the obvious: take the water
from Las Chacras by extending the pipes from here to Las Rosas.
When we heard about this (and around here secrets become public
knowledge immediately), our engineer made a study. Please
understand that of the 250 population of Las Chacras around twenty
per cent are “outsiders”, that is, refugees from Buenos Aires, and
they include an engineer, a lawyer, a writer, as well as various
varieties of artisans. In order to be considered a local you have
to have lived here at least five generations. Anyway, our engineer
made a study and informed us that our water surplus would dwindle
to a clap drip if the pipes are extended to Las Rosas, because
water will always strive to reach its destination first, then back
up and supply the lateral users with what’s left. In other words,
Las Rosas would consume “our” water and we would get the leftovers
– if there were any.  
  
This, obviously, is unacceptable. So we objected strenuously, to
the extent of trying to incorporate Las Chacras as an independent
village that would have jurisdiction over the water supply. That’s
when Villa de las Rosas began to play dirty. The mayor, Dr.
Ignacio Circunsición, belongs to the same party as the governor of
the Province, Dr. Jorge Washington de la Puta, which means that
they play on the same team. The Provincial Government can’t refuse
the village incorporation outright, but they can sure as hell sit
on the papers as long as they damn please, then lose them so
everything has to be done over. Furthermore, the mayor of Las
Rosas, in an attempt to divide and conquer, spread the word that
the “outsiders” in Las Chacras were leading the locals by their
noses. Normally this would be an effective ploy, except that the
spring of life, water, is involved, and for this issue locals and
outsiders are united. Our locals spread the word that any work on
the pipes would need police protection and it would be undone by
them at night. They also threatened to block the roads to traffic,
burn tires and generally conduct a terrific non-violent resistance
campaign, complete with *cacerolazos*, (pot-banging) and if it
turned violent it would be the mayor’s fault. The result until now
has been an impasse during which we keep the water.  
  
When the word spread that three more kings were on their way from
Villa de las Rosas it was immediately evident to all but the
densest among us that Mayor Circuncisión was trying to convince us
that he was a real nice guy and wouldn’t think of leaving us
without water.  
  
Cars passed occasionally so no one paid attention to a beat up red
taxi lumbering up the hill, until it stopped in front of the
school and the driver got out and put a rock under the rear right
wheel because his emergency brake didn’t work. His face was
splotched by burnt cork and he wore a long gown that looked like
his grandmother’s nightgown. Two more similarly dressed royalties
emerged from the taxi, their faces splotched by the red of
imbibing. All three placed yellow cardboard crowns on their heads
and retrieved bags of uninflated balloons from the interior of the
taxi. No one laughed because the children were staring at them in
awe.  
  
“The Magi arriving in a fucking **taxi**?” Nico exclaimed.  
  
“Shut up, kid," I told him, "and watch your language."  
  
From the left, up the mountain, we heard tinny Christmas music.
Having been diverted by the decrepit Magi on our right, we hadn’t
noticed the procession approaching from the left: three wise kings
mounted on Las Chacras camels – horses, as far as I could tell,
with bags stuffed with paper to form virtual humps on their backs.
Behind them chugged an old Chevy with a loudspeaker on its roof
blaring out the music. Meanwhile the taxi Magi were handing out
scrawny plastic bags of balloons to the kids while their parents
scowled behind them with their arms crossed. I sensed that an
interesting close encounter was about to occur. Nico had no
intention of accepting a gift from such disreputable monarchs and
remained beside me tapping his foot.  
  
When the Las Chacras royal procession reached us, one of the kings
tossed a fat package to Nico as they passed on to the school. Nico
inspected the transparent bag filled with cookies, wrapped candies
and balloons. A label pasted to the package read: Chacras
Productions invites you to a free showing of the movie “Shreck II”
at Clara de Luna tomorrow, 6^(th)of January at 9 p.m. Don’t be
misled into thinking that Las Chacras has a movie theater. Clara
de Luna is Doctor Luna’s house, where his wife operates a
large-screen video venture. Normally they charge one peso for
admission. Whether “Shreck II” is an appropriate film for Three
Kings Day is a question no one – least of all myself – would care
to ask.  
  
The lead Las Chacras king, black-faced, but recognizable as my
gardener, Rovindo, spotted the other kings handing out balloons
and roared: *hijos de puta*, and all three galloped the rest of
the way to the school hurling blasphemies worthy of next
Saturday’s confessional, which their wives would surely make them
attend. They pulled their mounts up sharply and Rovindo jumped off
and grabbed his counterpart’s crown, threw it to the earth and
shouted: *impostores*! The other two Las Chacras kings followed
his lead and finally all three crowns were being trampled before
the impostors’ trembling feet. Rovindo then told them in no
uncertain terms to depart the way they came or they’d get their
kingly asses kicked all the way to Villa de las Rosas. They
hastily complied by jumping into the taxi, which sped down the
hill leaving behind a cloud of dust that covered our kings and
left them coughing and cursing.  
  
“Mamá,” a little girl standing near me asked her mother, “what’s
an impostor?”  
  
“It’s someone who isn’t what he says he is, dear.”  
  
“They weren’t real kings then, were they?”  
  
“No dear, they were impostors from Villa de las Rosas.”  
  
“Are the other kings real?”  
  
“Of course. They’re from Las Chacras”  
  
“But I thought they were from the Orient…”  
  
Things had calmed down by then and the Las Chacras Magi remounted.
They rode back on up to the almacen-taberna accompanied by
self-satisfied, lukewarm applause. Nico had his present so we
turned homeward without waiting to hear how the young mother would
try to answer her daughter’s awkward query.  
  
“Look, Dad, It *is* the Southern Cross,” Nico said. “But it seems
smaller now. Why’s that?"  
  
“Things aren't always what they seem, son.”  
  
Nico thought for a moment, then said, "You can say that again,
Dad."  
  
[Español](fts-reyes-impostores.html)
