# Anthroposophical Guidelines 69 to 84

![](guidelines-image.png){class="a"}

## by Rudolf Steiner

### 69 to 84

### Spiritual Realms and Human Self-knowledge

The Guidelines which have been sent from the Goetheanum to the members
of the Anthroposophical Society during the past weeks link the psychic
gaze to the beings of the spiritual realms, to which man is related
above just as much as he is to the natural realms below.

True self-knowledge can be the guide to these spiritual realms. And when
such self-knowledge is striven for in the right way, one will find
understanding for what anthroposophy imparts as knowledge derived from
insight into the life of the spiritual world. One must only practice
self-knowledge in the right way, and not by merely concentrating on the
"inner self".

By means of such real self-knowledge, at first one encounters what is
alive in *remembrance*. In thought-pictures he recalls to consciousness
the shadows of what he directly experienced in the past. Upon seeing a
shadow, one is directed by an inner urge of thinking to the object which
cast the shadow. Whoever has a remembrance of something cannot arrive so
directly in his mind at the experience which persists in the
remembrance. But if he really reflects on his own being, he will have to
say: "It is himself, in his soul, who created the experience which cast
its shadow and made him what he is." The remembrance-shadows arise in
consciousness, and they are *illuminated* in the soul. Dead shadows live
in remembrance; living Being resides in the soul in which remembrance
continues to act.

One must only be clear about the relationship of remembrance to true
soul-life; and in this striving for clarity in self-knowledge one will
feel that he is on the path to the spiritual world. Through remembrance
one is looking at the spiritual aspect of his own soul. For normal
consciousness this visualization does not truly grasp the object. One
looks at something, but does not encounter reality.

By means of imaginative cognition, anthroposophy points to this reality.
It guides us from shadow to illumination. It does this when speaking of
man's *etheric body.* It shows how the physical body acts in the
thought-shadow-images; but how the etheric body *lives* in illumination.
With his physical body man is in the sense-world, with his etheric body
he is in the etheric world. He has an environment in the physical world;
he also has one in the etheric world. Anthroposophy refers to this
environment as the first hidden world in which man finds himself. It is
the realm of the *third hierarchy.*

We approach *language* in the same way we approached remembrance. It
arises from within man, as does remembrance. Through it man connects to
a being as he does in respect to his own experiences in remembrance. A
shadow nature is also present in words. It is stronger than the shadow
nature of remembrance. When a person casts the shadow from his
experiences in remembrance, his hidden self in active in the whole
process. He is present as illumination casts the shadow.

There is also a shadow-casting in language. Words are shadows. What
illumines here? Something stronger illumines, for words are stronger
shadows than remembrances. What remembrances can create in the human
self during the course of an earth life cannot create words. He must
learn them in relationship with others. A deeper being in him than the
one casting remembrance shadows must participate. Here anthroposophy
speaks from inspired cognition of the astral body, as it does of the
etheric body in respect to remembrance. The astral body is thus added to
the physical and etheric bodies as the human being's third component.

This third member also has a cosmic environment. It is that of the
*second hierarchy*. A shadow-image of this second hierarchy is given in
human speech. Man lives with his astral body within the realm of this
hierarchy.

We can go further. In speaking man participates with part of his being;
he puts his inner self in motion. What surrounds his inner self remains
in repose in speech itself. The motion involved in speaking wrests
itself from the human being in repose. But the whole man goes into
motion when he activates his limbs. In this movement he is no less
expressive than in remembrance and speech. Remembrance expresses
experiences; the essence of speech is that it expresses something. Thus
man in movement with his whole being expresses a "something".

Anthroposophy describes what is thus expressed as an additional
component of the human being. Through intuitive cognition it speaks of
the "true self" or the "I". It also finds its cosmic environment: that
of the *first hierarchy*.

By moving toward his remembrance-thoughts, man is met by a primary
super-sensible component, his own etheric being. By grasping himself as
a speaker, his astral being comes to meet him. This is no longer grasped
only by what acts inwardly, like remembrance. Inspiration sees it as
that which, in speaking, forms a physical act that originates in the
spirit. Speech is a physical process. Fundamentally it is a function
from the realm of the second hierarchy.

In the whole man in motion a more intensive physical action is present
than in speaking. It is not "something" which is formed; it is the whole
person. Here the first hierarchy is active in the formation of the
active physical human being.

In this way true self-knowledge can be practiced. One does not grasp his
own self alone in this way however. Gradually he grasps his component
members: the physical body, the etheric body, the astral body, the self.
And in grasping these elements, he gradually approaches the higher
worlds in which his being unfolds -- just as the three kingdoms of
nature: the animal, the vegetable, the mineral belong as three spiritual
realms to the cosmos as a whole.

The third hierarchy manifests itself as pure spirit-soul. It acts in
what man experiences psychically, that is, in his soul. Processes could
take place neither in the etheric nor in the astral regions if only this
hierarchy was active. Only the spiritual-psychic would exist.

70\. The second hierarchy manifests itself as the spiritual-psychic
which acts in the etheric. Everything etheric is a manifestation of the
second hierarchy. It manifests itself only indirectly in the physical
however. Its strength extends only to etheric processes. Only the
psychic and the etheric would exist if the third and second hierarchies
alone were active.

71\. The first hierarchy, the strongest, manifests itself as spiritually
active in the physical. It transforms the physical world into Cosmos.
The third and the second hierarchies serve as helpers.

72\. As soon as one approaches the higher components of the human being:
the etheric and astral bodies and the I-organization, he feels impelled
to seek the relation of man to the beings of the spiritual realms. Only
the physical-body organization can be illumined by the three physical
kingdoms of nature.

73\. Cosmic intelligence is integrated in the human being in the etheric
body. In order for this to happen, the activity of cosmic beings is
required who, cooperating, shape the etheric body, just as the physical
forces shape the physical.

74\. The spiritual world impresses moral impulses in the human being\'s
astral body. Whether or not these impulses can develop within the human
organization depends upon the activity of \[human?\] beings who not only
think the spiritual, but can also essentially shape it.

75\. In the I-organization, man experiences himself in the physical body
as spirit. In order for this to happen, the activity of beings is
necessary who themselves live in the physical world as spiritual beings.

#### How the Guidelines are to be used:

The Guidelines issued from the Goetheanum are meant to motivate the
members who wish to be active to give the content of anthroposophical
activity an integrative form. They will find that by considering these
guidelines every week, they provide guidance for deepening their
understanding of the material already given in the lecture cycles, and
enable them to present them at branch meetings in a more orderly
fashion.

It would certainly be preferable if every week the lectures given in
Dornach could be immediately communicated to all the branches. But one
can imagine the complicated technical arrangements necessary to do this.
The Executive Board is doing everything possible in this direction. But
we must take the available possibilities into account. The intentions
presented at the Christmas Conference will be realized. But we need
time.

Presently the branches which have members who visit the Goetheanum and
hear the lectures and can communicate their content to the branches have
an advantage. And the branches should realize that sending those members
to the Goetheanum is beneficial. But one should not undervalue the work
which has already been accomplished in the Anthroposophical Society and
which is available in the printed courses and lectures. Whoever examines
these lecture cycles and remembers what content is in one or the other
according to the titles, and then goes to the Guidelines, will find that
what is contained in the various lecture cycles is elaborated further in
the Guidelines. By reading them together, the viewpoints which are
separated in the individual cycles can be illustrated and explained with
the support of the Guidelines.

It is wasteful if we leave the printed cycles unused and are only
interested in "the newest" from the Goetheanum. It is also easy to
understand that the ability to print the cycles will gradually end if
they are not used extensively.

Another point comes into question here. In the dissemination of
anthroposophical content, conscientiousness and a sense of
responsibility are of prime importance. One must transmit what is said
about the spiritual world in images of spiritual facts and beings in a
way which does not give rise to misunderstandings. If someone hears a
lecture at the Goetheanum, he receives a direct impression of it. When
he then imparts it to others this impression lingers, and he is able to
formulate the things so that they are correctly understood. If a second
or even a third person becomes the intermediary however, the probability
increases that inaccuracies creep in. This should be kept in mind.

And a third viewpoint is the most important. It is not a question of
anthroposophical content being merely listened to or read, but that it
be assimilated by the living soul. What is essential lies in the
continuous thinking about and feeling what has been has been received.
This is meant to be stimulated by the Guidelines in respect to the
already available printed lecture cycles. If this viewpoint is
disregarded, it will become ever more difficult for the Being of
anthroposophy to be revealed through the Anthroposophical Society.

One says with apparent justification: "What good is it to me to hear so
much about spiritual worlds if I can't see into those worlds myself?"
This does not take into consideration the fact that the ability to see
is enhanced when anthroposophical content is treated as indicated here.
The lectures at the Goetheanum are given in such a way that their
content can livingly and freely be retained in the listeners' hearts. It
is no dead material for the mere passing on of information. It is of a
substance which by various viewpoints stimulates the ability to see into
spiritual worlds. One should not believe: I listen to the lectures; I
acquire knowledge of the spiritual world through meditation. One will
never really progress in that way. Both must work together into the
soul. And continuous thinking and feeling anthroposophical content is
also practice for the soul. One lives *seeing* into the spiritual world
if one proceeds with this content in the way indicated here.

In the Anthroposophical Society it is not sufficiently understood that
anthroposophy is not some bleak theory, but is meant to be true life.
True life, that is its essence; and when it is *made* into a bleak
theory it is often not a *better* theory than others, but a *worse* one.
But it is transformed into a theory when it is made into one, when it is
killed. It is not sufficiently understood that anthroposophy is not
merely a different worldview than others, but that *it must also be
assimilated differently*. One recognizes and experiences its essence by
this different way of assimilating it.

The Goetheanum should be recognized as the *necessary* center of
anthroposophical activity; but one must not forget that in the branches
the anthroposophical material which has been elaborated here should also
be utilized. What has been elaborated at the Goetheanum can be acquired
*gradually* by the whole Anthroposophical Society in a completely vital
sense, if as many branch members as possible come to the Goetheanum and
participate in *its* living activity. It must all, however, be done
introspectively; merely "communicating" the contents every week is not
acceptable. The Executive Committee at the Goetheanum will need time and
understanding from the members. Then we *will* be able to carry out the
intentions of the Christmas Conference.

76\. If one wishes to evoke a mental image of the first hierarchy
(Seraphim, Cherubim and Thrones), one must try to form images in which
the spiritual (only supersensibly visible) is actively manifested in the
form in which they appear in the sense-world. The spiritual as
sense-perceptible imagery must be the content of our thoughts about the
first hierarchy.

77\. If one wishes to evoke a mental image of the second hierarchy
(Kyriotetes, Dynameis, Exusiai), one must try to form images in which
the spiritual is manifested not in sense-perceptible forms, but in a
purely spiritual way. The spiritual in non-sense perceptible, purely
spiritual imagery must be the content of thoughts about the second
hierarchy.

78\. If one wishes to evoke a mental image of the third hierarchy
(Archai, Archangeloi, Angeloi), one must try to form images in which the
spiritual is manifested neither in sense-perceptible forms nor in a
purely spiritual way, but rather as thinking, feeling and willing act in
the human soul. The spiritual as psychic \[soul\] imagery must be the
content of thoughts about a third hierarchy.

#### At the Dawn of the Michael Age

Up until the ninth century after the mystery of Golgotha, man's relation
to his thinking was different than afterward. He did not feel that the
thoughts which lived in his mind\* were of his own making. He considered
them to be inspirations from a spiritual world. Even when he had
thoughts deriving from his sense perceptions, these thoughts were, for
him, revelations from the divine which spoke to him through the senses.

Whoever has spiritual vision will understand this feeling. For when a
spiritual reality informs his soul, he never feels that he has formed
the thoughts needed to grasp the spiritual perception, but he
*envisions* the thoughts which are contained in the perception as
objectively as the perception itself.

With the ninth century (of course such dates are to be understood as
being approximate, the transitions occurring gradually) the spark of
personal-individual intelligence ignited. Man had the feeling: *I form*
my thoughts. And this forming of thoughts became the most important
element in his soul life, so that the thinkers saw the essence of the
human soul in intelligent behavior. Previously they had an imaginative
conception of the soul. They didn't see its essence in the forming of
thoughts, but in its participation in the spiritual content of the
world. They considered that super-sensible spiritual beings were
thinking in them. Soul for them was what lives in man from the
super-sensible spiritual world.

From the moment one penetrates with perception into the spiritual world,
he encounters authentic spiritual beings. According to ancient
teachings, the power from which the thoughts about things flow was known
by the name *Michael.* The name can be retained. For one can say: once
human beings received thoughts from Michael. Michael governed cosmic
intelligence. From the ninth century on, people no longer felt that
Michael inspired their thoughts. They had escaped his domination; they
fell from the spiritual world into individual human minds.

From then on thoughts would evolve within humanity. At first people were
uncertain as to what they now possessed. This uncertainty inhabited the
scholastic teachings. The scholastics were divided between realists and
nominalists. The realists -- led by Thomas of Aquinas and those close to
him -- felt the old connection between thought and thing. They therefore
saw reality in the thoughts that lived in things. They viewed human
thoughts as reality which flowed from things into the mind. The
nominalists strongly felt that the mind forms the thoughts. They
considered thoughts to be only subjective -- which live in the mind and
which have nothing to do with things. They opined that thoughts were
only names invented by men for the things. (They didn't speak about
"thoughts", but "universals"; but that is irrelevant in principle, for
thoughts always have something universal compared to the individual
thing.)

One can say: The realists wanted to be true to Michael even though
thoughts had fallen from his realm into that of man. As thinkers they
wanted to serve Michael as the Prince of Cosmic Intelligence. -- The
nominalists in their unconscious minds fulfilled the separation from
Michael. They considered man rather than Michael to be the owner of
thoughts.

Nominalism gained in diffusion and influence. This situation prevailed
up until the last third of the nineteenth century. At that time, those
people who understood the events in the universe felt that Michael had
accompanied the stream of intellectual life. He sought a new
metamorphoses of his cosmic task. Previously he let the thoughts from
the spiritual world flow into human souls; from the last third of the
nineteenth century on he wants to live *in* human souls in which
thoughts are formed. Previously the people related to Michael saw him
unfold his activities in the spirit-world; now they realized that they
should allow Michael to reside in their hearts; they dedicated their
thought-filled spiritual life to him; now in free, individual thinking
life, they let themselves be instructed by Michael as to the soul's
right path.

Human beings who in their previous earth-lives were inspired by Michael
in their thinking, who were therefore Michael's servants, felt
themselves attracted to such voluntary Michael associations at the end
of the nineteenth century when they again lived on earth. From then on
they considered their old instigator of thoughts to be the guide to
higher thoughts.

He who is able to value such things knows what a transformation took
place during the last third of the nineteenth century in respect to
human thinking. Previously man could only feel how thoughts formed from
within his being; from the above-mentioned time he was able to lift
himself above his being; he could turn meaning towards the spiritual;
Michael meets him there, and shows himself to be related to all thinking
activity. He frees thoughts from the region of the head; he clears the
way to the heart for them. He liberates enthusiasm from feeling, so that
man can mindfully dedicate himself to all which he can experience in the
*light of thoughts.* The Michael age has dawned. Hearts begin to have
thoughts; enthusiasm no longer streams from mere mystical obscurity, but
from thinking endowed with clarity of mind. To understand this means to
receive Michael in one's sensibility. Thoughts which today strive
towards grasping the spiritual must come from hearts which beat for
Michael as the fiery Prince of Thought of the Universe.

\* *In the original German the word "Seele" (soul) is used. However, in
much of the context of these paragraphs the word "mind" -- which does
not exist in German -- would normally be used in English. I have
therefore (rather shakily) substituted mind for soul wherever I deemed
appropriate. Wherever "mind" appears above, the reader should perhaps
realize that the original reads "soul". (Trans.)*

79\. One can spiritually approach the third hierarchy (Archai,
Archangeloi, Angeloi) when one becomes so acquainted with thinking,
feeling and willing that he sees in them the spirit being active in the
soul. At first thinking places only *images* in the world, not something
real. Feeling moves in this imagery, speaking for reality in man, but
cannot fully manifest it. Willing unfolds a reality, which requires the
body, but which does not act consciously in its formation. What is
essential in thinking in order to make the body the basis of this
thinking, what is essential in feeling to make the body a participant in
a reality, what is essential in willing in order to consciously
participate in the body's formation -- is alive in the third hierarchy.

80\. One can spiritually approach the second hierarchy (Exusiai,
Dynameis, Kyriotesis) when one envisions the facts of nature as
manifestations of the living spirit in them. The second hierarchy, then,
has nature as its residence, in order to work in it on souls.

81\. One can spiritually approach the first hierarchy (Seraphim,
Cherubim, Thrones) when one envisions the facts of nature and human life
as the deeds (creations) of the spirit acting in them. The first
hierarchy, then, has the natural and human realms as the scene of its
unfolding activity.

82\. Man gazes up at the star-worlds; what he sees is the external
manifestation of the spiritual beings and their deeds, of which we spoke
in the previous considerations as the beings of the spiritual realms
(hierarchies).

83\. The earth is the stage for the three realms of nature and the human
realm, insofar as they manifest the deeds of spiritual beings to the
external senses.

84\. The forces which work into the earthly realms of nature and
humanity by spiritual beings reveal themselves to the human spirit
through true, spiritual knowledge of the star-worlds.
