# The Magic Mound - Chapter 18 to 19

![](magic-mound-cover.png){class="a"}

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 18

Death and Rebirth

Alaram wanted Sergio to explain death and rebirth to the rest of the
men, but Sergio reminded him that he was only a boy and would find it
difficult to speak about that subject to a group of men. Also, he
argued, the men accepted Alaram as their king and would be more likely
to believe him that Sergio. This argument did not really convince
Alaram, but he agreed to speak to the men himself because he saw that
Sergio didn\'t want to.

The next morning the men stood in circle around Alaram. He insisted that
Mireya, Sergio and Divino stand with him in the circle.

\"Friends and brothers,\" Alaram began, \"I wish to present to you these
two boys who have come to us on the mound from Brazil, from whence, as
you know, Mireya also came. They are only boys, it is true, but they
possess great wisdom imparted to them by their teacher, Dona Ute. Mireya
is also a wise child, which leads me to believe that Brazil is a land of
wise people.\" Mireya and Sergio glanced at each other and smiled, for
they knew that most of the people in Brazil were not wise at all and
that their own knowledge was very limited. Sergio also knew, because
Dona Ute had told him so, that true wisdom is exceedingly rare, not only
in Brazil, but in the world.

\"The older boy is called Sergio,\" Alaram went on, \"and is brother is
Divino, which means godly. They, like Mireya, want to grow up.\" The men
looked at the children and nodded. They understood that. \"They bring us
great wisdom and wisdom is the greatest gift the gods can give us.
Listen then, to the wisdom of Sergio and his teacher, Dona Ute.\"

Alaram walked slowly around the circle and looked at each man. He held
his hands before his breast with the palms pressed together and each man
imitated the gesture as he passed. The children were awed by the
solemnity of the occasion.

\"When we die we do not really die. It is true that we leave Maxa and
our bodies stay behind, but we know from what our god told us many ages
ago that each of us has a spirit that lives forever. What he did not
tell us, but what Dona Ute\'s god told her, is that we are born again
later and return to Maxa as little children.\" Alaram paused and
whispered to Sergio, \"Do we only come back to Maxa, or could we also be
born in Brazil?\" Sergio didn\'t know the answer to that, and he said
so.

\"Possibly even in Brazil,\" Alaram announced. This caused a murmur of
surprise among the men. \"But the most important thing is that death is
not death. Once we convince our women of that we can all stop drinking
the vitaluz, there will be children again as there were before and,
eventually, the children will be ourselves.\" The men smiled and began
to talk among themselves.

\"How much more interesting life will be,\" Alaram exclaimed, \"and how
dull it is now. We are strong and healthy but without women and children
and bored with our paradise.\" The men nodded.

\"Better to die and live again!\"

\"Hooray!\" Alto shouted and jumped into the air clapping his hands. The
others were astonished, for they had never seen him so enthusiastic
about anything. But his act was contagious. Another man jumped and
clapped, then another until they were all jumping and clapping and
hugging each other.

Alaram turned to his young friends. \"They have decided. We leave
tomorrow.\" He embraced them in turn, first Sergio, then Divino and
finally Mireya. At that moment Platero trotted up to him and butted him
from behind.

\"Platero,\" Mireya admonished, \"don\'t do that to Alaram.\" Platero
hung his head. \"Why, I believe you are jealous.\"

\"I didn\'t know donkeys could be jealous,\" Divino said.

\"Platero is as very special donkey, he\'s almost like a boy.\" She
glanced at Sergio, who blushed.

\"Only silly boys are jealous,\" he said.

\"Then you could never be jealous?\" Mireya teased.

\"Of course not.\" Sergio patted Platero to hide his embarrassment.

\"But you are a boy.\"

\"Not a silly one.\"

\"No,\" Mireya smiled. \"You are a very nice boy, wise as Alaram said,
and I like you very much.\"

Sergio was overjoyed to hear Mireya say that, but he was, for all his
wisdom, only a boy and therefore shy were girls were concerned. His ears
turned a bright pink and he stammered, \"I\...I like you too.\" Then he
jumped onto Platero\'s back and trotted into the forest.

Divino didn\'t know what to make of these antics, so he put his hands in
his tararobe pockets, kicked the earth in front of him and followed
Alaram into his house.

> Chapter 19

Go to Where the Wind in Silence Blows

Sergio still had not told Alaram how they would cross the chasm. It was
sufficient for him that Sergio was leading and that Tamoshot had told
him how.

The next morning the whole group marched diagonally northeast to the
chasm, then followed it, going north. From within and over the chasm the
constant wind blew and they had to speak loudly in order to be heard.
Never was it as loud as where Platero and the boys had flown over
though. That was far to the north and Sergio hoped to avoid the long
journey by finding a place along the way where the wind was strong
enough to carry them across. Whenever he thought that the wind sounded
louder than usual, he tossed a stick into the chasm. Sometimes it bobbed
up level with the surface and fell down again; mostly they never saw it
again.

The men watched this ritual in silence. Only Mireya asked Sergio why he
did it, and he told her how they had flown over the chasm on the wind.
She agreed that it would be better not to tell the men unless they
insisted. If they saw Sergio and Divino fly over they would follow, but
might not accept the idea without seeing it in action.

Sergio finally was resigned to going all the way to where they had flown
over because he found no place along the way where the wind was strong
enough to bear even a stick let alone grown men and a donkey.

They arrived there after a journey of many days. The wind blew so loudly
that even shouting was not enough to make one\'s self heard. Sergio
picked up a branch, which might have been the same one Tamoshot had used
to demonstrate the wind\'s power, and hurled it over the chasm. It
hardly dropped at all before twirling high up into the air - and was
blown back over their heads to land with a thud behind them.

Sergio sat on the ground and buried his face in his hands so the others
wouldn\'t see the tears in his eyes. It had been too much responsibility
for him after all. He had been stupid not to realize that the wind would
blow in one direction only. They would never get out of Maxalabora now.

\"What are we going to do now?\" Divino asked.

Sergio did not hear him and couldn\'t have answered if he had. Mireya
knelt down alongside him and put her hand on his shoulder. \"Don\'t be
sad, Sergio,\" she said. \"Maxalabora isn\'t a bad place at all.\"

\"LOOK!\" Divino shout at the top of his lungs.

They all looked across the chasm and beyond the river to Urmaxa, where
Divino was pointing. There, in the distance, descending from the
mountain, was a small man dressed in a red-toned tararobe.

It was, of course - \"Tamoshot!\" Divino cried to the wind and waved.
The little man waved back as he continued on his way towards them. He
approached the river where Sergio and Divino had crossed on Platero\'s
back, stood observing the flowing current for a few moments, then ran
right into it. He did not sink as Arman\'s men did, but raced across,
barely getting his feet wet.

On the other side of the chasm the men clapped and Divino shouted,
\"Hurrah, Tamoshot.\" To the others he said, \"Tamoshot will tell us
what to do,\" but of course no one heard him.

The little man stood on his side of the chasm and flashed his big
wrinkled grin. Sergio gestured for him to come, to fly over the chasm.
Tamoshot\'s grin disappeared but he made no move to cross the chasm.
Suddenly he squatted down and began to write in the earth with his
finger, just as he had done before.

\"What is he doing?\" Alaram shouted in Sergio\'s ear.

\"He is writing something,\" Sergio shouted back.

\"What?\"

Sergio shook his head, meaning that he didn\'t know.

Mireya, who was still kneeling, felt a force flow through her body, a
force so strength giving that she knew she must do something with it.
She cleared the ground in front of her and wrote in the earth with her
finger. Alaram noticed her and alerted Sergio. They watched her write:

*To find the stream that cross the chasm flows*

Go to where the wind in silence blows.

* *When Mireya finished she looked across the chasm to where Tamoshot,
still squatting, was gazing fixedly at them. \"This is what Tamoshot
wrote,\" she said.

Sergio knelt beside her and asked her to repeat what she had said. She
shouted it in his ear.

\"How do you know?\" he shouted back.

\"I felt a strong urge to write in the earth, and as I wrote I knew that
Tamoshot was guiding my finger.\"

\"What does it mean?\" Alaram asked, perplexed.

\"Tamoshot is going away,\" Divino cried. \"Tamoshot! Tamoshot!\" They
watched as the little man ran back across the river, slowly climbed up
the mountain and disappeared among the rocks.

\"He\'s gone,\" Divino said softly, knowing no one could hear him
anyway, \"he always goes.\"

Sergio turned back to study the words Mireya had written. Once sure that
he had them memorized, he turned toward the forest, motioning to the
others to follow. When they were far enough away from the chasm so the
noise of the wind no longer prevented them from speaking to each other,
he stopped and said to the rest: \"We must find a place where the wind
blows but is at the same time silent.\" He paused for just a moment. \"I
was a fool. I should have realized that the wind which howls *at* us can
only carry things in our direction and can never carry us across to the
other side.\"

\"The wind is to carry us across?\" Alaram asked.

\"Yes, it\'s how we crossed the chasm.\"

\"Tamoshot said so?\"

\"Yes.\"

Alaram nodded. Some of the men murmured among themselves, but there
seemed to be no opposition

\"Only where the wind is silent to us does it blow the other way, to the
other side of the chasm where we want to go,\" Sergio said. He looked at
the others, appealing to their memories. \"Did anyone notice a place on
our march where the wind was silent?\"

After it became obvious that nobody would answer, Alto stepped forward.
\"We went from our settlement to the chasm in a northeasterly
direction,\" he said.

\"We know that, Alto,\" Alaram said, \"What of it?\"

\"Well, Sire, there might be a place to the south of where we started
where the wind is silent.\" Alto blushed, fearing that what he just said
might be foolish. He was not known for saying clever things.

\"You\'re right, Alto,\" Sergio exclaimed, \"it\'s the only
possibility.\"

Alto beamed as Alaram patted him on the back.

\"Wait,\" Sergio said and held his head. \"What a fool I am.\"

\"Don\'t say that, Sergio,\" Mireya said, wanting to console him. \"How
could you have known?\"

\"I should have known, but I forgot about the White Stone\'s
inscription.\"

\"The White Stone?\"

\"Yes. Divino, don\'t you remember? It said: TO RETURN SELECT THE
SHORTEST WAY TOWARD THE RISING SUN.\"

\"Yes, I remember.\"

\"The shortest way is directly from the men\'s settlement to the chasm,
east, where the sun rises. We didn\'t go straight east from the
settlement, we turned north. I\'ll bet the place to cross is on a direct
line from the settlement to the chasm.\"

\"I don\'t understand,\" Alaram said, \"but if you say so it must be
so.\"

\"We must go back to where we started,\" Sergio said. \"I\'m sorry.\"

\"Good,\" Alaram agreed. \"We can cut through the forest instead of
following the chasm to get there. It will be a lot quicker that way.\"

So they marched through the forest in good spirits, especially Platero,
who found many good things to eat and who was made much of by the birds
and animals of the forest, who had never seen a white donkey, or any
color donkey, before. As is often the case when a journey is pleasant,
it seemed short. In fact, by cutting through the forest, they saved
several days of travel and soon they were back at the settlement. They
rested a while and then went due east to the chasm.

Sergio went north and Divino south, searching for the place to cross.

\"Here it is!\" Divino shouted.

Sergio ran back to him and listened. The wind in the chasm was no more
than a barely audible murmur. There were no branches nearby so Sergio
sent Divino into the forest to look for one. He returned dragging a
branch almost as big as he was. \"May I throw it, Sergio?\"

\"Yes, just be careful.\"

Divino went to the edge of the chasm and pushed more than threw the
branch over. It rose immediately high over the chasm, whirling and
twirling toward the other side, until it plopped down there and lay
still.

\"This is the place,\" Sergio said, and he went and stood beside his
brother.

\"Can I go first?\" Divino asked.

\"No, I\'ll go, just in case.\"

Sergio jumped into the chasm. The men gasped and Mireya put her hand
over her mouth to stifle a scream. Then they were relieved to see Sergio
flying over the chasm, his tararobe air-filled like a parachute and his
arms held out for balance, twirling like a top. He landed on his feet on
the other side of the chasm and fell over from dizziness.

\"Here I come,\" Divino cried and followed Sergio, landing beyond him
because he was lighter. Platero gave them all (except Sergio and Divino)
a fright when he disappeared into the depths of the chasm. They sighed
when he reappeared and landed, still running until Sergio called for him
to stop.

Mireya followed and called back that it was a wonderful ride, although
her heart was beating like a drum.

Alaram went to the edge and took a deep breath. Sergio was a little
anxious because the men had no tararobes, only tarakilts. He reasoned,
however, that if the wind could carry Platero, who wore neither tararobe
nor tarakilt, only his silver necklace, it should be strong enough to
carry the men as well.

Alaram jumped into the chasm and sank down like a stone in water,
causing momentary anguish to the men awaiting their turns. But soon he
rose over the chasm. His tarakilt provided less lift than the tararobes,
so he went skimming across like a boomerang, landed on his belly and
rolled over three times before coming to a halt and standing up on
unsteady legs. Alto followed, then the rest of the men, until all
twenty-four were on the other side. There were many bruises and
scratches and a sprained wrist or ankle or two, but no one was seriously
injured.

They made camp nearby and slept the sleep of weary travelers who feel
that the most difficult part of their journey is behind them. They were,
however, mistaken.


[Chapter 17](https://southerncrossreview.org/159/magic-mound-16.html)


The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle: [The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)
and in Spanish at: "[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)
