# Requiem for an Empire

![](mccoy-main.png){class="a"}

### How America's Strongman Will Hasten the Decline of U.S. Global Power

## By [Alfred McCoy](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/alfredmccoy/)

Some 15 years ago, on December 5, 2010, a historian writing for
*TomDispatch* made a prediction that may yet prove prescient. Rejecting
the consensus of that moment that U.S. global hegemony would persist to
2040 or 2050, he [argued
that](https://tomdispatch.com/alfred-mccoy-taking-down-america/) "the
demise of the United States as the global superpower could come... in
2025, just 15 years from now."

To make that forecast, the historian conducted what he called "a more
realistic assessment of domestic and global trends." Starting with the
global context, he argued that, "faced with a fading superpower," China,
India, Iran, and Russia would all start to "provocatively challenge U.S.
dominion over the oceans, space, and cyberspace." At home in the United
States, domestic divisions would "widen into violent clashes and
divisive debates... Riding a political tide of disillusionment and
despair, a far-right patriot captures the presidency with thundering
rhetoric, demanding respect for American authority and threatening
military retaliation or economic reprisal." But, that historian
concluded, "the world pays next to no attention as the American Century
ends in silence."

Now that a "far-right patriot," one Donald J. Trump, has indeed captured
(or rather recaptured) the presidency "with thundering rhetoric," let's
explore the likelihood that a second Trump term in office, starting in
the fateful year 2025, might actually bring a hasty end, silent or
otherwise, to an "American Century" of global dominion.

**Making the Original Prediction**

Let's begin by examining the reasoning underlying my original
prediction. (Yes, of course, that historian was me.) Back in 2010, when
I picked a specific date for a rising tide of American decline, this
country looked unassailably strong both at home and abroad. The
presidency of Barack Obama was producing a "post-racial" society. After
recovering from the 2008 financial crisis, the U.S. was on track for a
decade of dynamic growth --- the auto industry saved, oil and gas
production booming, the tech sector thriving, the stock market soaring,
and employment solid. Internationally, Washington was the world's
preeminent leader, with an unchallenged military, formidable diplomatic
clout, unchecked economic globalization, and its democratic governance
still the global norm.

Looking forward, leading historians of empire agreed that America would
remain the world's sole superpower for the foreseeable future. Writing
in the *Financial Times *in 2002, for instance, Yale professor Paul
Kennedy, author of a widely read book on imperial decline,
[argued](https://ratical.org/ratville/JFK/JohnJudge/linkscopy/EagleLand.html)
that "America's array of force is staggering," with a mix of economic,
diplomatic, and technological dominance that made it the globe's "single
superpower" without peer in the entire history of the world. Russia's
defense budget had "collapsed" and its economy was "less than that of
the Netherlands." Should China's high growth rates continue for another
30 years, it "might be a serious challenger to U.S. predominance" ---
but that wouldn't be true until 2032, if then. While America's "unipolar
moment" would surely not "continue for centuries," its end, he
predicted, "seems a long way off for now."

Writing in a similar vein in the *New York Times *in February 2010,
Piers Brendon, a historian of Britain's imperial decline,
[dismissed](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/25/opinion/25brendon.html)
the "doom mongers" who "conjure with Roman and British analogies in
order to trace the decay of American hegemony." While Rome was riven by
"internecine strife" and Britain ran its empire on a shoestring budget,
the U.S. was "constitutionally stable" with "an enormous industrial
base." Taking a few "relatively simple steps," he concluded, Washington
should be able to overcome current budgetary problems and perpetuate its
global power indefinitely.

[Buy the
Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642595780/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

When I made my very different prediction nine months later, I was
coordinating a [network of 140
historians](https://goldberg.history.wisc.edu/current-past-projects/)
from universities on three continents who were studying the decline of
earlier empires, particularly those of Britain, France, and Spain.
Beneath the surface of this country's seeming strength, we could already
see the telltale signs of decline that had led to the collapse of those
earlier empires.

By 2010, economic globalization was cutting good-paying factory jobs
here, income inequality was widening, and corporate bailouts were
booming --- all essential ingredients for rising working-class
resentment and deepening domestic divisions. Foolhardy military
misadventures in Iraq and Afghanistan, pushed by Washington elites
trying to deny any sense of decline, stoked simmering anger among
ordinary Americans, slowly discrediting the very idea of international
commitments. And the erosion of America's relative economic strength
from half the world's output in 1950 to a quarter in 2010 meant the
wherewithal for its unipolar power was fading fast.

Only a "near-peer" competitor was needed to turn that attenuating U.S.
global hegemony into accelerating imperial decline. With rapid economic
growth, a vast population, and the world's longest imperial tradition,
China seemed primed to become just such a country. But back then,
Washington's foreign policy elites thought not and even admitted China
to the World Trade Organization (WTO), [fully
confident](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2018-02-13/china-reckoning),
according to two Beltway insiders, that "U.S. power and hegemony could
readily mold China to the United States' liking."

Our group of historians, mindful of the frequent imperial wars fought
when near-peer competitors finally confronted the reigning hegemon of
their moment --- think Germany versus Great Britain in World War I ---
fully expected China's challenge would not be long in coming. Indeed, in
2012, just two years after my prediction, the U.S. National Intelligence
Council
[warned](http://www.dni.gov/files/documents/GlobalTrends_2030.pdf) that
"China alone will probably have the largest economy, surpassing that of
the United States a few years before 2030" and this country would no
longer be "a hegemonic power."

Just a year after that, China's president, Xi Jinping, drawing on a
massive [\$4
trillion](https://files.stlouisfed.org/files/htdocs/wp/2017/2017-001.pdf)
in foreign-exchange reserves accumulated in the decade after joining the
WTO, announced his bid for global power through what he called "the
[Belt and Road
Initiative](https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/chinas-massive-belt-and-road-initiative),"
history's largest development program. It was designed to make Beijing
the center of the global economy.

In the following decade, the U.S.-China rivalry would become so intense
that, last September, Secretary of the Air Force Frank Kendall
[warned](https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3907669/threat-from-china-increasing-air-force-official-says/):
"I've been closely watching the evolution of \[China's\] military for 15
years. China is not a future threat; China is a threat today."

**The Global Rise of the Strongman**

Another major setback for Washington's world order, long legitimated by
its promotion of democracy (whatever its own dominating tendencies),
came from the rise of populist strongmen worldwide. Consider them part
of a nationalist reaction to the West's aggressive economic
globalization.

At the close of the Cold War in 1991, Washington became the planet's
sole superpower, using its hegemony to forcefully promote a wide-open
global economy --- forming the [World Trade
Organization](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/17/opinion/wto-trade-biden.html)
in 1995, pressing open-market
"[reforms](https://www.epw.in/journal/1993/39/special-articles/liberalisation-and-structural-adjustment-latin-america-search)"
on developing economies, and knocking down tariff barriers worldwide. It
also built a global communications grid by
[laying](https://approvednetworks.com/blog/transoceanic-fiber-optics-the-cable-that-runs-the-tech-world/?srsltid=AfmBOopBD0stCxGQ1h9vL8q9o8OqU0_M1XWQZ48XBVNFIA7pawpxHEsx)
700,000 miles of fiber-optic submarine cables and then
[launching](https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/satellite-database) 1,300
satellites (now 4,700).

By exploiting that very globalized economy, however, China's [industrial
output](https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RL33534.pdf) soared to \$3.2
trillion by 2016, surpassing both the U.S. and Japan, while
simultaneously
[eliminating](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/29/business/economy/more-wealth-more-jobs-but-not-for-everyone-what-fuels-the-backlash-on-trade.html)
2.4 million American jobs between 1999 and 2011, ensuring the closure of
factories in countless towns across the South and Midwest. By fraying
social safety nets while eroding protection for labor unions and local
businesses in both the U.S. and Europe, globalization reduced the
quality of life for many, while creating inequality on a staggering
scale and stoking a working-class reaction that would crest in a global
wave of angry populism.

Riding that wave, right-wing populists have been winning a steady
succession of elections --- in Russia (2000), Israel (2009), Hungary
(2010), China (2012), Turkey (2014), the Philippines (2016), the U.S.
(2016), Brazil (2018), Italy (2022), the Netherlands (2023), Indonesia
(2024), and the U.S. again (2024).

Set aside their incendiary us-versus-them rhetoric, however, and look at
their actual achievements and those right-wing demagogues turn out to
have a record that can only be described as dismal. In Brazil, Jair
Bolsonaro
[ravaged](https://www.vox.com/down-to-earth/2022/9/29/23373427/amazon-rainforest-brazil-jair-bolsonaro-lula-deforestation)
the vast Amazon rainforest and left office amid an [abortive
coup](https://www.cnn.com/2024/03/15/americas/brazil-bolsonaro-coup-plot-allegations-intl-hnk/index.html).
In Russia, Vladimir Putin invaded Ukraine,
[sacrificing](https://www.hhs.se/en/about-us/news/site-publications/2024/russias-economic-imbalances/)
his country's economy to capture some more land (which it hardly
lacked). In Turkey, Recep Erdogan caused a crippling [debt
crisis](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/24/business/turkey-erdogan-istanbul-election-economy-inflation.html),
while [jailing 50,000](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-36842073)
suspected opponents. In the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte [murdered
30,000](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/nov/04/rodrigo-dutertes-war-on-drugs-in-the-philippines-explained-in-30-seconds-ntwnfb)
suspected drug users and [courted
China](https://www.dw.com/en/has-duterte-surrendered-to-beijing-on-the-south-china-sea/a-46390503)
by giving up his country's claims in the resource-rich South China Sea.
In Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu has wreaked havoc on Gaza and neighboring
lands, in part to [stay in
office](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/03/opinion/netanyahu-trump-harris.html)
and stay out of prison.

**Prospects for Donald Trump's Second Term**

After the steady erosion of its global power for several decades,
America is no longer the --- or perhaps even an --- "exceptional" nation
floating above the deep global currents that shape the politics of most
countries. And as it has become more of an ordinary country, it has also
felt the full force of the worldwide move toward strongman rule. Not
only does that global trend help explain Trump's election and his recent
reelection, but it provides some clues as to what he's likely to do with
that office the second time around.

In the globalized world America made, there is now an intimate
interaction between domestic and international policy. That will soon be
apparent in a second Trump administration whose policies are likely to
simultaneously damage the country's economy and further degrade
Washington's world leadership.

Let's start with the clearest of his commitments: environmental policy.
During the recent election campaign, Trump
[called](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/trump-climate-change-scam-hurricane-helene-georgia-b2621271.html)
climate change "a scam" and his transition team has already drawn up
[executive
orders](https://www.reuters.com/business/environment/trump-prepares-withdrawing-paris-climate-agreement-nyt-reports-2024-11-08/)
to exit from the Paris climate accords. By quitting that agreement, the
U.S. will abdicate any leadership role when it comes to the most
consequential issue facing the international community while reducing
pressure on China to curb its greenhouse gas emissions. Since these two
countries now account for [nearly
half](https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions-metrics) (45%) of global
carbon emissions, such a move will ensure that the world blows past the
target of keeping this planet's temperature rise to [1.5
degrees](https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20231130-climate-crisis-the-15c-global-warming-threshold-explained)
Centigrade until the end of the century. Instead, on a planet that's
already had [12 recent
months](https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-68110310) of just
such a temperature rise, that mark is expected to be permanently reached
by perhaps 2029, the year Trump finishes his second term.

On the domestic side of climate policy, Trump
[promised](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/trump-hates-bidens-climate-law-his-allies-are-making-money-it-2024-10-25/)
last September that he would "terminate the Green New Deal, which I call
the Green New Scam, and rescind all unspent funds under the misnamed
Inflation Reduction Act." On the day after his election, he committed
himself to increasing the country's oil and gas production,
[telling](https://www.eenews.net/articles/trump-victory-rattles-us-energy-policy/)
a celebratory crowd, "We have more liquid gold than any country in the
world." He will undoubtedly also
[block](https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/trump-return-will-slow-not-stop-us-clean-energy-boom-2024-11-06/)
wind farm leases on Federal lands and
[cancel](https://www.cnbc.com/2024/11/06/trump-reelection-what-it-means-for-evs.html)
the \$7,500 tax credit for purchasing an electrical vehicle.

As the world shifts to renewable energy and all-electric vehicles,
Trump's policies will undoubtedly do lasting damage to the American
economy. In 2023, the International Renewable Energy Agency
[reported](https://www.irena.org/Publications/2024/Sep/Renewable-Power-Generation-Costs-in-2023)
that, amid continuing price decreases, wind and solar power now generate
electricity for less than half the cost of fossil fuels. Any attempt to
slow the conversion of this country's utilities to the most
cost-effective form of energy runs a serious risk of ensuring that
American-made products will be ever less competitive.

To put it bluntly, he seems to be proposing that electricity users here
should pay twice as much for their power as those in other advanced
nations. Similarly, as relentless engineering innovation makes electric
vehicles cheaper and more reliable than petrol-powered ones, attempting
to slow such an energy transition is likely to make the U.S. auto
industry uncompetitive, at home and abroad.

Calling tariffs "the greatest thing ever invented," Trump has
[proposed](https://us-east-1.envoy.cirrus.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-11-08/how-trump-could-put-his-campaign-promises-on-tariffs-into-action?srnd=phx-latest)
slapping a 20% duty on all foreign goods and 60% on those from China. In
another instance of domestic-foreign synergy, such duties will
undoubtedly end up crippling American farm exports, thanks to
retaliatory overseas tariffs, while dramatically raising the cost of
consumer goods for Americans, stoking inflation, and slowing consumer
spending.

Reflecting his
[aversion](https://thehill.com/opinion/international/466619-trumps-aversion-to-alliances-is-making-the-world-a-more-dangerous-place/)
to alliances and military commitments, Trump's first foreign policy
initiative will likely be an attempt to negotiate an end to the war in
Ukraine. During a CNN town hall in May 2023, he
[claimed](https://apnews.com/article/trump-russia-ukraine-war-un-election-a78ecb843af452b8dda1d52d137ca893)
he could stop the fighting "in 24 hours." Last July, he
[added](https://ecfr.eu/article/trumps-return-is-terrible-news-for-ukraine-europe-should-step-into-the-breach-but-will-it/):
"I would tell \[Ukraine's president\] Zelenskyy, no more. You got to
make a deal."

Just two days after the November election, [according
to](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2024/11/10/trump-putin-phone-call-ukraine)
the *Washington Post,* Trump reputedly
[told](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2024/11/10/trump-putin-phone-call-ukraine/?utm_campaign=wp_evening_edition&utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter&carta-url=https%3A%2F%2Fs2.washingtonpost.com%2Fcar-ln-tr%2F3f9a6d6%2F67312ce1ebbf4a6a98a2070e%2F597342d6ae7e8a1cf4b8309d%2F15%2F42%2F67312ce1ebbf4a6a98a2070e)
Russian President Vladimir Putin in a telephone call, "not to escalate
the war in Ukraine and reminded him of Washington's sizable military
presence in Europe." Drawing on sources inside the Trump transition
team, the *Wall Street Journal*
[reported](https://www.wsj.com/world/trump-presidency-ukraine-russia-war-plans-008655c0?st=3EZGUw&)
that the new administration is considering "cementing Russia's seizure
of 20% of Ukraine" and forcing Kyiv to forego its bid to join NATO,
perhaps for as long as 20 years.

With Russia drained of manpower and its economy pummeled by three years
of bloody warfare, a competent negotiator (should Trump actually appoint
one) might indeed be able to bring a tenuous peace to a ravaged Ukraine.
Since it has been Europe's frontline of defense against a revanchist
Russia, the continent's major powers would be expected to play a
[significant
role](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/nov/08/trumps-return-terrible-news-ukraine-europe-divided).
But Germany's coalition government has just collapsed; French president
Emmanuel Macron is crippled by recent electoral reverses; and the NATO
alliance, after three years of a shared commitment to Ukraine, faces
real uncertainty with the advent of a Trump presidency.

**America's Allies**

Those impending negotiations over Ukraine highlight the paramount
importance of alliances for U.S. global power. For 80 years, from World
War II through the Cold War and beyond, Washington relied on bilateral
and multilateral alliances as a critical force multiplier. With China
and Russia both rearmed and increasingly closely aligned, reliable
allies have become even more important to maintaining Washington's
global presence. With 32 member nations representing a billion people
and a commitment to mutual defense that has lasted 75 years, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization
([NATO](https://www.nato.int/nato-welcome/)) is arguably the most
powerful military alliance in all of modern history.

Yet Trump has long been sharply critical of it. As a candidate in 2016,
he
[called](https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/closer-trumps-years-criticizing-nato-defense-spending/story?id=107201586)
the alliance "obsolete." As president, he mocked the treaty's
mutual-defense clause,
[claiming](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/trump-calls-out-very-aggressive-montenegro-latest-nato-jibe-n892311)
even "tiny" Montenegro could drag the U.S. into war. While campaigning
last February, he
[announced](https://www.cnn.com/2024/02/10/politics/trump-russia-nato/index.html)
that he would tell Russia "to do whatever the hell they want" to a NATO
ally that didn't pay what he considered its fair share.

Right after Trump's election, caught between what one analyst
[called](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/nov/08/trumps-return-terrible-news-ukraine-europe-divided)
"an aggressively advancing Russia and an aggressively withdrawing
America," French President Macron insisted that the continent needed to
be a "more united, stronger, more sovereign Europe in this new context."
Even if the new administration doesn't formally withdraw from NATO,
Trump's repeated hostility, particularly toward its crucial
mutual-defense clause, may yet serve to eviscerate the alliance.

In the Asia-Pacific region, the American presence rests on three sets of
overlapping alliances: the
[AUKUS](https://www.defense.gov/Spotlights/AUKUS/) entente with
Australia and Britain, the [Quadrilateral Security
Dialogue](https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/quad-indo-pacific-what-know)
(with Australia, India, and Japan), and a chain of bilateral defense
pacts stretching along the Pacific littoral from Japan through Taiwan to
the Philippines. Via careful diplomacy, the Biden administration
[strengthened](https://tomdispatch.com/powder-keg-in-the-pacific/) those
alliances, bringing two wayward allies, Australia and the Philippines
that had drifted Beijing-wards**,** back into the Western fold. Trump's
penchant for abusing allies and, as in his first term,
[withdrawing](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-08-11/present-disruption)
from multilateral pacts is likely to weaken such ties and so American
power in the region.

Although his first administration famously waged a trade war with
Beijing, Trump's attitude toward the island of Taiwan is bluntly
transactional. "I think, Taiwan should pay us for defense," he
[said](https://www.businessinsider.com/what-second-trump-term-could-mean-for-taiwan-2024-11)
last June, adding: "You know, we're no different than an insurance
company. Taiwan doesn't give us anything." In October, [he
told](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/trade-taiwan-now-trump-china-braces-volatile-new-era-us-ties-rcna179070)
the *Wall Street Journal *that he would not have to use military force
to defend Taiwan because China's President Xi "respects me and he knows
I'm f------ crazy." Bluster aside, Trump, unlike his predecessor Joe
Biden, has never committed himself to defend Taiwan from a Chinese
attack.

Should Beijing indeed attack Taiwan outright or, as appears more likely,
impose a crippling [economic
blockade](https://features.csis.org/chinapower/china-blockade-taiwan/)
on the island, Trump seems unlikely to risk a war with China. The loss
of Taiwan would break the U.S. position along the Pacific littoral, for
80 years the fulcrum of its global imperial posture, pushing its naval
forces back to a "second island chain" running from Japan to Guam. Such
a retreat would represent a major blow to America's imperial role in the
Pacific, potentially making it no longer a significant player in the
security of its Asia-Pacific allies.

**A Silent U.S. Recessional**

Adding up the likely impact of Donald Trump's policies in this country,
Asia, Europe, and the international community generally, his second term
will almost certainly be one of imperial decline, increasing internal
chaos, and a further loss of global leadership. As "respect for American
authority" fades, Trump may yet resort to "threatening military
retaliation or economic reprisal." But as I predicted back in 2010, it
seems quite likely that "the world pays next to no attention as the
American Century ends in silence."

Copyright 2024 Alfred W. McCoy

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Alfred McCoy](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/alfredmccoy/)

**Alfred W. McCoy**,
a [*TomDispatch* regular](https://tomdispatch.com/an-american-new-deal-for-an-entire-continent/)[,](https://tomdispatch.com/how-to-end-the-war-in-ukraine/)
is the Harrington professor of history at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. He is the author of [*In the Shadows of the American
Century: The Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).
His newest book is [*To Govern the Globe: World Orders and Catastrophic
Change*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642595780/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
(Dispatch Books).

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com/) where this article originally appeared, without the title image.
