# The Queen of Spades

![](queen-of-spades-5-6.png){class="a"}

## by Alexander Pushkin

### CHAPTER V.

Three days after this fatal night, at nine o\'clock in the morning,
Hermann entered the convent where the last respects were to be paid to
the mortal remains of the old Countess. He felt no remorse, though he
could not deny to himself that he was the poor woman\'s assassin. Having
no religion, he was, as usual in such cases, very superstitious;
believing that the dead Countess might exercise a malignant influence on
his life, he thought to appease her spirit by attending her funeral.

The church was full of people, and it was difficult to get in. The body
had been placed on a rich catafalque, beneath a canopy of velvet. The
Countess was reposing in an open coffin, her hands joined on her breast,
with a dress of white satin, and head-dress of lace. Around the
catafalque the family was assembled, the servants in black caftans with
a knot of ribbons on the shoulder, exhibiting the colours of the
Countesses coat of arms. Each of them held a wax candle in his hand. The
relations, in deep mourning---children, grandchildren, and
great-grandchildren---were all present; but none of them wept.

To have shed tears would have looked like affectation. The Countess was
so old that her death could have taken no one by surprise, and she had
long been looked upon as already out of the world. The funeral sermon
was delivered by a celebrated preacher. In a few simple, touching
phrases he painted the final departure of the just, who had passed long
years of contrite preparation for a Christian end. The service concluded
in the midst of respectful silence. Then the relations went towards the
defunct to take a last farewell After them, in a long procession, all
who had been invited to the ceremony bowed for the last time to her who
for so many years had been a scarecrow at their entertainments. Finally
came the Countess\'s household; among them was remarked an old
governess, of the same age as the deceased, supported by two woman. She
had not strength enough to kneel down, but tears flowed from her eyes as
she kissed the hand of her old mistress.

In his turn Hermann advanced towards the coffin. He knelt down for a
moment on the flagstones, which were strewed with branches of yew. Then
he rose, as pale as death, and walked up the steps of the catafalque. He
bowed his head. But suddenly the dead woman seemed to be staring at him;
and with a mocking look she opened and shut one eye. Hermann by a sudden
movement started and fell backwards. Several persons hurried towards
him. At the same moment, close to the church door, Lisaveta fainted.

Throughout the day Hermann suffered from a strange indisposition. In a
quiet restaurant, where he took his meals, contrary to his habit, he
drank a great deal of wine with the object of stupefying himself. But
the wine had no effect but to excite his imagination, and give fresh
activity to the ideas with which he was preoccupied.

He went home earlier than usual, lay down with his clothes on upon the
bed, and fell into a leaden sleep. When he woke up it was night, and the
room was lighted up by the rays of the moon. He looked at his watch; it
was a quarter to three. He could sleep no more. He sat up on the bed and
thought of the old Countess. At this moment someone in the street passed
the window, looked into the room, and then went on. Hermann scarcely
noticed it; but in another minute he heard the door of the ante-chamber
open. He thought that his orderly, drunk as usual, was returning from
some nocturnal excursion; but the step was one to which he was not
accustomed. Somebody seemed to be softly walking over the floor in
slippers.

\|The door opened, and a woman, dressed entirely in white, entered the
bedroom. Hermann thought it must be his old nurse, and he asked himself
what she could want at that time of night.

But the woman in white, crossing the room with a rapid step, was now at
the foot of his bed, and Hermann recognised the Countess.

\"I come to you against my wish,\" she said in a firm voice. \"I am
forced to grant your prayer. Three, seven, ace, will win, if played one
after the other; but you must not play more than one card in twenty-four
hours, and afterwards, as long as you live, you must never touch a card
again. I forgive you my death on condition of your marrying my
companion, Lisaveta Ivanovna.\"

With these words she walked towards the door, and gliding with her
slippers over the floor, disappeared. Hermann heard the door of the
ante-chamber open, and soon afterwards saw a white figure pass along the
street. It stopped for a moment before his window, as if to look at him.

Hermann remained for some time astounded. Then he got up and went into
the next room. His orderly, drunk as usual, was asleep on the floor. He
had much difficulty in waking him, and then could not obtain from him
the least explanation. The door of the ante-chamber was locked.

Hermann went back to his bedroom, and wrote down all the details of his
vision.

#### CHAPTER VI.

Two fixed ideas can no more exist together in the moral world, than in
the physical two bodies can occupy the same place at the same time; and
\"Three, seven, ace\" soon drove away Hermann\'s recollection of the old
Countess\'s last moments. \"Three, seven, ace\" were now in his head to
the exclusion of everything else.

They followed him in his dreams and appeared to him under strange forms.
Threes seemed to be spread before him like magnolias, sevens took the
form of Gothic doors, and aces became gigantic spiders.

His thoughts concentrated themselves on one single point. How was he to
profit by the secret so dearly purchased? What if he applied for leave
to travel? At Paris, he said to himself, he would find some
gambling-house where, with his three cards, he could at once make his
fortune.

Chance soon came to his assistance. There was in Moscow a society of
rich gamblers, presided over by the celebrated Tchekalinski, who had
passed all his life playing at cards and had amassed millions. For while
he lost silver only, he gained bank-notes. His magnificent house, his
excellent kitchen, his cordial manners, had brought him numerous friends
and secured for him general esteem.

When he came to St. Petersburg the young men of the capital filled his
rooms, forsaking balls for his card-parties, and preferring the emotions
of gambling to the fascinations of flirting. Hermann was taken to
Tchekalinski by Narumoff. They passed through a long suite of rooms,
full of the most attentive, obsequious servants. The place was crowded.
Generals and high officials were playing at whist; young men were
stretched out on the sofas, eating ices and smoking long pipes. In the
principal room at the head of a long table, around which were assembled
a score of players, the master of the house held a faro bank.

He was a man of about sixty, with a sweet and noble expression of face,
and hair white as snow. On his full, florid countenance might be read
good humour and benevolence. His eyes shone with a perpetual smile.
Narumoff introduced Hermann. Tchekalinski took him by the hand, told him
that he was glad to see him, that no one stood on ceremony in his house;
and then went on dealing. The deal occupied some time, and stakes were
made on more than thirty cards. Tchekalinski waited patiently to allow
the winners time to double their stakes, paid what he had lost, listened
politely to all observations, and, more politely still, put straight the
corners of cards, when in a fit of absence some one had taken the
liberty of turning them down. At last when the game was at an end,
Tchekalinski collected the cards, shuffled them again, had them cut, and
then dealt anew.

\"Will you allow me to take a card?\" said Hermann, stretching out his
arm above a fat man who occupied nearly the whole of one side of the
table. Tchekalinski, with a gracious smile, bowed in consent. Naroumoff
complimented Hermann, with a laugh, on the cessation of the austerity by
which his conduct had hitherto been marked, and wished him all kinds of
happiness on the occasion of his first appearance in the character of a
gambler.

\"There!\" said Hermann, after writing some figures on the back of his
card.

\"How much?\" asked the banker, half closing his eyes. \"Excuse me, I
cannot see.\"

\"Forty-seven thousand rubles,\" said Hermann.

Everyone\'s eyes were directed toward the new player.

\"He has lost his head,\" thought Harumoff.

\"Allow me to point out to you,\" said Tchekalinski, with his eternal
smile, \"that you are playing rather high. We never put down here, as a
first stake, more than a hundred and seventy-five rubles.\"

\"Very well,\" said Hermann; \"but do you accept my stake or not?\"

Tchekalinski bowed in token of acceptation. \"I only wish to point out
to you,\" he said, \"that although I am perfectly sure of my friends, I
can only play against ready money. I am quite convinced that your word
is as good as gold; but to keep up the rules of the game, and to
facilitate calculations, I should be obliged to you if you would put the
money on your card.\"

Hermann took a bank-note from his pocket and handed it to Tchekalinski,
who, after examining it with a glance, placed it on Hermann\'s card.

Then he began to deal. He turned up on the right a ten, and on the left
a three.

\"I win,\" said Hermann, exhibiting his three.

A murmur of astonishment ran through the assembly. The banker knitted
his eyebrows, but speedily his face resumed its everlasting smile.

\"Shall I settle at once?\" he asked.

\"If you will be kind enough to do so,\" said Hermann.

Tchekalinski took a bundle of bank-notes from his pocket-book, and paid.
Hermann pocketed His winnings and left the table.

Narumoff was lost in astonishment. Hermann drank a glass of lemonade and
went home.

The next evening he returned to the house. Tchekalinski again held the
bank. Hermann went to the table, and this time the players hastened to
make room for him. Tchekalinski received him with a most gracious bow.
Hermann waited, took a card, and staked on it his forty-seven thousand
roubles, together with the like sum which he had gained the evening
before.

Tchekalinski began to deal. He turned up on the right a knave, and on
the left a seven.

Hermann exhibited a seven.

There was a general exclamation. Tchekalinski was evidently ill at ease,
but he counted out the ninety-four thousand roubles to Hermann, who took
them in the calmest manner, rose from, the table, and went away.

The next evening, at the accustomed hour, he again appeared. Everyone
was expecting him. Generals and high officials had left their whist to
watch this extraordinary play. The young officers had quit their sofas,
and even the servants of the house pressed round the table.

When Hermann took his seat the other players ceased to stake, so
impatient were they to see him have it out with the banker who, still
smiling, watched the approach of his antagonist and prepared to meet
him. Each of them untied at the same time a pack of cards. Tchekalinski
shuffled, and Hermann cut. Then the latter took up a card and covered it
with a heap of banknotes. It was like the preliminaries of a duel. A
deep silence reigned through the room.

Tchekalinski took up the cards with trembling hands and dealt. On one
side he put down a queen and on the other side an ace.

\"Ace wins,\" said Hermann.

\"No. Queen loses,\" said Tchekalinski.

Hermann looked. Instead of ace, he saw a queen of spades before him. He
could not trust his eyes! And now as he gazed, in fascination, on the
fatal card, he fancied that he saw the queen of spades open and then
close her eye, while at the same time she gave a mocking smile. He felt
a thrill of nameless horror. The queen of spades resembled the dead
Countess!

Hermann is now at the Obukhoff Asylum, room No. 17 a hopeless madman! He
answers no questions which we put to him. Only he mumbles to himself
without cessation, \"Three, seven, ace; three, seven, *queen*!\"

Among Pushkin's most characteristic features were his wide knowledge of
world [literature](https://www.britannica.com/art/literature), as seen
in his interest in such English writers as [William
Shakespeare](https://www.britannica.com/biography/William-Shakespeare),
[Lord Byron](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Lord-Byron-poet), [Sir
Walter Scott](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Walter-Scott), and
the Lake poets; his "universal sensibility"; and his ability to
re-create the spirit of different races at different historical epochs
without ever losing his own individuality. This is particularly marked
in the "little tragedies," which are concerned with an analysis of the
"evil passions" and, like the [short
story](https://www.britannica.com/art/short-story) *Pikovaya Dama*
(1834; *The Queen of Spades*),
[exerted](https://www.britannica.com/dictionary/exerted) a direct
influence on the subject matter and techniques of the novels of [Fyodor
Dostoyevsky](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Fyodor-Dostoyevsky).

[Chapters 3 \-- 4](https://southerncrossreview.org/160/queen-of-spades-3-4.html)
