
# On Missing Dr. Strangelove

![](strangelove-2.jpg){class="a"}

### Or How Americans Learned to Stop Worrying and Forgot the Bomb

## By [Andrew Bacevich](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/)

Bosley Crowther, chief film critic for the **New York Times**, didn't
quite know what to make of **Dr. Strangelove** at the time of its
release in January 1964. Stanley Kubrick's dark antiwar satire was
"beyond any question the most shattering sick joke I've ever come
across," he
[wrote](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/01/06/17/specials/southern-strangelove.html).
But if the film had its hilarious moments, Crowther found its overall
effect distinctly unnerving. What exactly was Kubrick's point? "When
virtually everybody turns up stupid or insane --- or, what is worse,
psychopathic --- I want to know what this picture proves."

We may find it odd for an influential critic to expect a movie to
"prove" anything. Kubrick's aim was manifestly not to prove, but to
subvert and discomfit.

[]{#anchor}With feature-length hyperbole --- not a wisp of subtlety
allowed --- **Dr. Strangelove** made the case that a deep strain of
madness had infected the entire U.S. national security apparatus. From
the "War Room" that was the Pentagon's holiest of holies all the way to
the cockpit of a B-52 hurtling toward its assigned Russian target with a
massive nuclear bomb in its belly, whack jobs were in charge.

A mere two years after the Cuban missile crisis, few Americans viewed
the prospect of nuclear Armageddon as a joking matter. Yet here was
**Dr. Strangelove **treating this deadly serious topic as suitable for
raucous (and slightly raunchy) comedy. That's what bothered Crowther,
who admitted to being "troubled by the feeling, which runs through the
film, of discredit and even contempt for our whole defense
establishment, up to and even including the hypothetical
Commander-in-Chief."

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

If the nation owed its very survival to that defense establishment --- a
widely accepted supposition during the Cold War --- Kubrick's
contemptuous attitude was nothing short of blasphemous.

We may imagine other inhabitants of the circle in which Crowther lived
and worked sharing his unease. Collectively, they comprised a world of
believers --- not a faith community in a religious sense but an elite
establishment. Members of that establishment accepted as gospel an
identifiable set of political, cultural, and moral propositions that
defined mid-twentieth-century American life.

Chief among them was a conviction that communism --- monolithic,
aggressive, and armed to the teeth --- posed an existential threat to
what was then known as the Free World. In the face of that, it had
become incumbent upon the United States to arm itself to the teeth. The
preeminent symbol of U.S. readiness to thwart that Red threat was a
massive nuclear strike force held on hair-trigger alert to obliterate
the entire Soviet empire. (A typical 1961 report from the Joint Chiefs
of Staff
[suggested](https://thebulletin.org/2023/01/cold-war-estimates-of-deaths-in-nuclear-conflict/)
that a full-scale U.S. nuclear attack on the Soviet Union would kill
half its population, or 108 million people. An analysis the Joint Chiefs
provided to the Kennedy White House that same year put the dead for
Russia and China together at upwards of 600 million.)

Instant readiness to wage World War III thereby held the key to averting
World War III. Politicians, generals, and PhD-wielding "defense
intellectuals" all affirmed the impeccable logic of such an arrangement.
As the menacing motto of the Strategic Air Command, which controlled
America's nuclear bombers and missiles, put it: "Peace Is Our
Profession."

Kubrick was not alone in expressing concern that such a saber-rattling
pursuit of peace might yield an altogether different outcome. Could
policies supposedly designed to prevent a nuclear holocaust actually
produce it?

Arbiters of American culture like Crowther might have bridled at such a
thought but proved unable to prevent it from gaining purchase. For
authors of pulp fiction thrillers and Hollywood studio executives, the
anxieties induced by the possibility of nuclear war were pure catnip. In
1964 alone, in addition to **Dr. Strangelove**, major movie releases
included **Fail Safe** (Moscow and New York City are vaporized) and
**Seven Days in May** (a military plot to overthrow a dovish U.S.
president is barely averted). The near-miss of [the Cuban missile
crisis](https://www.history.com/topics/cold-war/cuban-missile-crisis)
endowed such fictional plots with an eerie element of verisimilitude.
So, too, did the USSR's atmospheric detonation of a 50-megaton nuclear
weapon in October 1961. That "[Tsar
Bomba](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tsar_Bomba;%20https:/www.bbc.com/future/article/20170816-the-monster-atomic-bomb-that-was-too-big-to-use#:~:text=Tsar%20Bomba%20unleashed%20almost%20unbelievable,expended%20during%20World%20War%20Two.)"
was over 1,500 times more powerful than both of the obliterating atomic
bombs dropped on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August
1945 to end World War II.

As long as the Cold War continued, popular worries about a single spasm
of violence extinguishing humankind persisted, with national leaders
obliged to offer at least gestures of sympathetic concern. Thus was born
the project that came to be known as "nuclear disarmament," which dated
from President John F. Kennedy's [justifiably famous June 1963
speech](https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/american-university-19630610)
at American University. Here was his inaugural "pay any price, bear any
burden" speech of 1961 turned inside out and upside down. As if
anticipating the cultural mood of our own day, the commander-in-chief
vowed to "help make the world safe for diversity." What followed was JFK
at his most eloquent:

"For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all
inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the same air. We all cherish
our children's future. And we are all mortal."

From that moment on, Washington's enthusiasm for ever larger nuclear
arsenals containing ever more powerful weapons began to ebb. So, too,
did public deference to the proponents of
"[overkill](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/overkill)."
Crucially, however, the U.S. military's ability to incinerate millions
at a moment's notice remained intact --- as it does to this day, with a
"modernization" of the American arsenal at a cost of a [couple of
trillion
dollars](https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/USNuclearModernization)
now well underway.

In a sense, the "disarmament" movement of those years compares to the
collective American response to the climate crisis of our own day.
Sometimes the most expeditious approach to preserving the status quo,
after all, is to make a pretense of embracing change. Think of Frank
Sinatra partnering with Elvis Presley in a duet of "[Love Me
Tender](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4BHkvkkIzlo)." Even without
Irving Berlin and the Gershwins, Old Blue Eyes kept on selling records
well into the era of rock-and-roll.

***Putin Spoils the Party***

Then came the collapse of communism.

As if at a stroke, worries about World War III dissipated. American
schoolchildren soon forgot all about mandatory duck-and-cover drills.
**Dr. Strangelove** became a curiosity from another era like **The
Maltese Falcon** or **Gone with the Wind**. And while the **Bulletin of
the Atomic Scientists **[continued to
update](https://thebulletin.org/doomsday-clock/) its creepy "Doomsday
Clock," the public ceased to pay much attention.

Considered in retrospect, Bosley Crowther had seemingly gotten the
better of Stanley Kubrick in their little tiff. After all, a
quarter-century after **Dr. Strangelove** appeared, the Cold War ended
peacefully without a hint of World War III. Yes, a nuclear holocaust
remained hypothetically possible, but it was no longer something worth
fretting about.

Yet as nuclear nightmares faded, blissful dreams of peace did not take
their place. Indeed, the ensuing post-Cold-War era, extending from the
fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 to the Russian invasion of Ukraine in
2022, found the United States perpetually at war or verging on war.
During that period, however, few paid serious attention to the
possibility that any of our conflicts might involve the use of nuclear
weapons.

Nukes did retain occasional utility as a **rationale** for war.
Consider, for instance, the decision of President George W. Bush and
crew to invade Iraq in 2003, supposedly to eliminate Saddam Hussein's
[(non-existent) nuclear
arsenal](https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2019/3/20/18274228/ari-fleischer-iraq-lies-george-w-bush-wmds).
Still, among the subjects that riled up American politicians, newspaper
columnists, and late-night TV hosts, nuclear worries seldom made the
cut. Even as the Pentagon
[embarked](https://armscontrolcenter.org/fact-sheet-u-s-nuclear-weapons-modernization-costs-constraints/)
on that multi-trillion-dollar program of nuclear (re)armament ---
marketed as needed safety upgrades --- few seemed to notice. For
Americans, culture wars, real and ongoing, took precedence over the
theoretical prospect of replaying Hiroshima on a grander scale.

One might have thought that Russia's attack on Ukraine and the
protracted conflict that followed would have revived the nuclear
nightmares of an earlier era. After all, Vladimir Putin has shown no
reticence when it comes to sowing death and destruction (nor to
[implicitly threatening the
use](https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/has-putin-threatened-use-nuclear-weapons-2022-10-27/)
of "tactical" nuclear weapons). His determination to achieve Russia's
political objectives regardless of cost seems readily apparent.

Furthermore, U.S. officials and major media outlets have concurred in
classifying the Russian president as uniquely dangerous. For example, a
recent [front-page news
article](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/19/world/europe/ukraine-war-russia-putin.html)
in the **New York Times** --- not an editorial or opinion piece ---
described Putin as beset by "grievances, paranoia and \[an\] imperialist
mind-set" (that is, as an embittered nutcase).

Putin's ostensible paranoia in combination with Russia's [gigantic
nuclear
arsenal](https://armscontrolcenter.org/fact-sheet-russias-nuclear-inventory/)
would seem to justify a hair-on-fire response from Washington national
security officials. Certainly, the danger of nuclear weapons use today
greatly exceeds that of 20 years ago when the Bush administration argued
that the Iraqi nuclear threat justified a [Ukraine-style
invasion](https://tomdispatch.com/the-american-war-from-hell-20-years-later/).

The Biden administration's insouciance regarding Russian nukes therefore
qualifies as, at the very least, odd. [According
to](https://jacobin.com/2023/02/crimea-russia-ukraine-strategy-us-nuclear-war-risk?mc_cid=e114cee7ac&mc_eid=be86100418)
my colleague at the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft Anatol
Lieven, "The greatest threat of nuclear catastrophe that humanity has
ever faced is now centered on the Crimean peninsula." His understanding
of all things Russian greatly exceeds my own, but that assessment
strikes me as about right. And while Planet Earth dangles on the edge of
an abyss, the U.S. response is to debate whether or not to [supply
Ukraine with
F-16s](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/feb/19/us-f-16s-ukraine-un-ambassador).

As far as I can tell, Biden administration policy regarding that
embattled land rests on one crucial assumption: in the face of an
open-ended, incremental U.S. escalation, the Kremlin will ultimately
submit. In turn, Ukraine's inevitable victory will endow Europe with
peace and security until the end of time.

How that assumption meshes with the conviction that Putin is mentally
unbalanced isn't clear. Counting on an irrational actor to behave
rationally is an inherently risky proposition.

***Who's in Charge Here?***

Ukraine has become the locus of a conflict that, willy-nilly, pits
Russia against the West --- which means against the United States. How
far can Washington push Putin before he tries to retaliate in some
fashion against his primary adversary? Does President Biden even
recognize the urgency of that question? If he does, he's chosen not to
share his concerns with the American people.

Granted, Biden has made clear his determination to prevent any direct
American involvement in combat with Russia. The president likely
calculates that the willingness of Americans to support Ukraine with
billions of dollars in weapons and munitions stems in part from the fact
that no U.S. troops are fighting and dying.

But there may well be another assumption that underlies popular support
for U.S. involvement in Ukraine --- namely, that the people in charge,
beginning with the man in the White House, know what's actually going
on. **Dr. Strangelove** confronted that assumption head-on 69 years ago
and rejected it utterly, depicting the people then in charge as
somewhere between clueless and just plain dangerous.

Not for a moment would I liken Mr. Biden to that movie's President
Merkin Muffley, current chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark
Milley to Buck Turgidson, or any senior officer on active duty to
Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper, the crazed commander of that film's
Burpelson Air Force Base. (Although I do wonder why the four-star Air
Force General who recently [told his
troops](https://www.airforcetimes.com/news/your-air-force/2023/02/01/this-air-force-general-is-rallying-his-troops-for-war-with-china/)
to get ready for war with China in two years wasn't immediately canned.)

Here's the problem, at least as I see it: however smart and well
intentioned, the people in charge in Washington today don't know
everything they think they know --- and everything they need to know
either. Detailed studies of the Cuban missile crisis have revealed that
Kennedy and his men were acting on information that was all too often
inadequate or simply wrong. They thought themselves in a position to
control events when they weren't. To a considerable extent, the U.S. and
the Soviet Union avoided war in October 1962 through sheer dumb luck ---
and the [selective
disobedience](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0307386333/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)
of certain U.S. and Soviet junior officers who knew a stupid order when
they heard one.

Of course, that was way back in the 1960s, ancient history as far as
most Americans are concerned. Today, thanks to the wonders of advanced
technology, U.S. intelligence and decision-making are much improved,
right? Alas, recent screwups, including the disastrous termination of
the Afghan War, don't treat that claim kindly.

A proxy war pitting the United States against a paranoid adversary with
a massive nuclear arsenal at his command: What could possibly go wrong?
Kubrick's timeless masterpiece invites us to reflect on that question
--- and the sooner we do, the better.

Copyright 2023 Andrew Bacevich

Featured image: [Tiki Bijou : Dr.
Strangelove](https://flickr.com/photos/hmk/50845653416/in/photolist-2kt4gjQ-q3nC3u-nnMKTh-5SbNq-4eMMZi-8prDLF-7KhE-Mbk3-nEgeHQ-779wL2-ebmmiQ-ebmkZy-b3vHyR-M41CG2-2cPMHTg-ebfFrK-ebfxpB-ebfFJa-dUmUs-pmk9G-pmmfE-pmk9U-ciRuuW-aUVbmF-2k7D6ke-aWBhXe-egxe6Z-pRqPhj-2hgWBvH-2ojPQpw-cGyEy-6XCsTn-FBtqqV-ebmpwS-3oW9w-5eMBpm-2tsDnR-2hgYg1D-937wpk-2hgXRxm-2hgXQvm-LMPjLM-2o1ZCv3-8yE4Gi-83oSK1-pmmfR-fGcgS7-9whH9M-3W6Z2a-21S8sPY)
by [H. Michael Karshis](https://flickr.com/photos/hmk/) is licensed
under [CC BY 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/) / Flickr

**Follow TomDispatch on **[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)** and
join us on **[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)**. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, **[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)** (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel **[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**, and
Tom Engelhardt's **[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
as well as Alfred McCoy's **[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)**,
John Dower's **[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
**and Ann Jones's** [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Andrew Bacevich](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/andrewbacevich/)

***Andrew Bacevich***,
a [**TomDispatch**](https://tomdispatch.com/russias-underperforming-military-and-ours/)[ regular](https://tomdispatch.com/russias-underperforming-military-and-ours/),
is chairman and co-founder of the [Quincy Institute for Responsible
Statecraft](https://quincyinst.org/). His new Dispatch book, [**On
Shedding an Obsolete Past: Bidding Farewell to the American
Century**](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
has just been published**.**

Thanks to [TomDispatch.com](https://tomdispatch.com)
