![](love-spies.jpg){class="a"}

# Love in the Life of Spies

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter One

#### Paternostro\
East Berlin, 1974

Judith Baumgartner and Dr. Hans Staudenmaier were huddled over a map of
West Berlin in a small basement room with no windows. A long florescent
light on the ceiling hummed like a beehive. They were preparing a list
of objectives that the Soviet Mission Military Patrol was to photograph
on its next rounds. Actually they were suggesting, the Russians would
decide. It was frustrating work for they seldom knew if their allies
would approve their suggestions. Hans Staudenmaier, a robust middle-aged
man with a goatee and rimless glasses, was doing the selecting and
dictating to Judith, who made notes in German, which she would later
translate into Russian in a stenographer\'s spiraled notebook made in
West Germany. She was young and pretty and intense; there was a certain
hardness about her which would have seemed unusual in one so young if we
did not know that they were in the building in East Berlin that housed
the STASI -- East Germany's State Security organization. It was
difficult for them to think of objectives in West Berlin that hadn't
already been photographed.

Judith looked out the rain-speckled window at a gray sky and, below, the
gray city even when the sun was shining. She considered asking the
Military Patrol to concentrate on vehicles for a few days, especially
military ones, moving or parked. Yes, that was a good idea -- but just
as she was about to ask Staudenmaier, who was the senior person in the
section, what he thought of it, a phone rang in an adjoining room and a
young man yelled from there: \"Fräulein Baumgartner, it\'s for you.\"
She sighed as though annoyed, but was relieved to escape from her
Staudenmaier's halitosis for a while at least. It was the Director\'s
secretary on the phone, who told her to go directly to the Herr Direktor
Kamerad Wolff's office. The secretary waited only for her to confirm:
\"Jawohl, Frau Schmidt, aber\...\" and hung up before Judith could ask
why she was being summoned to such lofty heights. She walked quickly
back to Dr. Staudenmaier, \"I have to go upstairs, Herr Doktor. Sorry,
I\'ll be back as soon as I can.\"

\"Anything the matter?\" he asked, noticing her nervousness, but also
curious.

\"No.\" If she said that the Director wanted to see her it would be all
over the office in a matter of seconds. She hurried off to the
\"paternostro\", the ancient but reliable dumbwaiter-like elevator, and
stepped in like the experienced passenger she was. The paternostro fit
only one, so she could wonder in private what the Director, Herr Dr.
Wolff, could possibly want with her. She hadn\'t done anything wrong
that she was aware of, but she knew that in the STASI one was not always
necessarily aware of one\'s own wrongdoing. The paternostro was slow,
for safety reasons, but it arrived on the fourth floor too soon for her.
She wished she wasn\'t wearing those ugly, but warm, woollen stockings.
She knocked on the Director\'s door and heard Frau Schmidt\'s hoarse
cigarette voice calling her to enter.

\"Fräulein Baumgartner?\"

\"Yes.\"

Frau Schmidt, dumpy and fiftyish, rose and opened the Director\'s door
behind her. \"Fräulein Baumgartner,\" she announced. Instead of telling
Judith to wait, she stood aside as the Director himself came out smiling
and took Judith\'s hand. She thought for a moment that he might kiss it.
He was a tall, moderately ugly, middle-aged man with crows-feet behind
his eyes from smiling. He wore a double-breasted suit, obviously western
made, and was as elegant as any capitalist banker.

\"I\'m very pleased to meet you, Fräulein Baumgartner,\" he said, in a
surprisingly high voice. \"Won\'t you come in?" Why should he be pleased
to meet her? Judith thought. Well, at least he didn\'t sound as though
he was about to fire her. The office was as elegant as he was, and warm.
Ah, a fireplace -- and burning wood instead of coal. He invited her to
sit.

\"Coffee or tea?\" he asked. She chose coffee. \"Bring us two coffees,
please, Frau Schmidt,\" Wolff ordered as he closed the door.

\"Now,\" he said sitting behind his desk across from her, still
smiling,\" you must be wondering why I sent for you.\"

\"Ja, Herr Kamerad Direktor, I was wondering that.\"

He looked at her for a few moments before going on, studying her pale
face, untidy hair and proletarian clothing with approval. \"I knew your
father,\" he finally said.

She nodded.

\"I was a student of his before\...actually even when the Gestapo
arrested him.\"

\"In Leipzig?\" It was a stupid question, because it must have been
Leipzig, but she felt she had to say something.

\"Yes. He was a brilliant man and a dedicated Communist.\"

\"I know,\" Judith, agreed, \"and a good man.\"

\"And that combination -- good, a Communist and a Jew to boot, was what
doomed him.\" Judith didn\'t know if he was being cynical or simply
stating an obvious fact. He certainly didn\'t sound sympathetic. She
wondered what had saved Wolff from the same fate. Perhaps he had been
none of those things her father was.

\"I had no reputation and wasn\'t a Jew,\" Wolff said, as though
divining her thoughts. \"So I was drafted, but deserted to the
Russians.\" He smiled. \"It\'s an interesting story, but I won\'t go
into it now.\" Did he intend to go into it later she wondered as Frau
Schmidt entered carrying a tray with the coffee things. She poured while
they sat in silence. Judith knew from the aroma that the coffee was
real.

When his secretary had left, Wolff said, \"I\'ll come right to the
point, Fraülein\...May I call you Judith? As your father\'s friend and
the difference in our ages, it doesn\'t seem incorrect.\" Judith *Sie*
or *Du*? No, that would be too much. \"Of course, Kamerad Direktor,\"
she said.

\"Good, thank you,\" he smiled. \"How long have you been with us,
Judith?\"

He must know that, she thought. \"A little over a year,\" she answered.

\"Already a year? And I know from the records that you did very well in
training and have been doing well in your work as well.\"

\"Thank you.\"

He nodded. "Cigarette?\" He opened a box on his desk. She was about to
reach for one, but when she saw that they were Russian *papirosi, *she
declined.  Wolff laughed. "They *are* awful, aren't they. I only use
them to test a person's taste." He reached into his jacket pocket and
took out a pack of Marlboros. He offered her one, which she, despite a
fleeting notion that it could be a trap, accepted.

"How did you escape from the Nazis, if you don't mind my asking?"

"Not at all. I was sent to the country, to some friends of my fathers."

"I see. Gentile friends?

"Yes."

"And did you change your name -- outwardly, that is?"

"I used their family name, and they called me Rotraud."

He smiled, widely this time. "Wunderbar! But frankly I prefer Judith. I
believe she was a very strong Biblical personality."

"Yes, she was. She defeated Israel's enemies."

"Did they treat you well, that family I mean, not Israel's enemies?"

Despite his moderate ugliness and his exalted position, Judith found him
quite charming. "Yes, very well, and I will always be grateful to them"

"Of course you will."

Wolff looked down at his desk for a moment or so, as though deciding
something. "You know, of course, that we have people in the west,\" he
said after lighting his own, then her Marlboro, with a hammer and sickle
embossed zippo.

She nodded.

\"And, as you can imagine, we don\'t send just anyone there.\" He paused
as though expecting a reply.

\"Of course not,\" Judith said.

\"There are many temptations there -- if one isn\'t a good socialist.\"

She decided not to say yes and of course to everything he said, so she
waited. \"Are you a good socialist, Judith?\"

\"You know that I am, Kamerad Direktor.\"

The smile was gone now. \"How should I know that? Socialism isn\'t
necessarily inherited, you know."

\"In my case it is,\" Judith answered. \"I loved my father very much and
admired his ideals.\"

Wolff raised his eyebrows: \"Admired?\"

\"I loved them,\" she clarified.

\"You are speaking in the past tense, Judith.\"

\"I mean when he was alive. I still do and I am a committed Socialist,
Kamerad Direktor,\" she answered, returning his gaze.

\"I believe you are, Judith,\" he said. \"Do you take sugar?\"

\"No, thank you.\"

"Well, then, please.\" He picked up his cup and sipped. She followed
suit, glad that her hand wasn\'t shaking. And why should it be? They
understood each other and she knew she had passed the test, for whatever
purpose it may have been posed.

\"Are you really fluent in English?\" he asked in English. \"Forgive my
asking, but I\'ve found that fluency is relative where many of our
people are concerned.\"

\"I don\'t think I am,\" she replied in English

He frowned. \"Explain, please.\"

\"My English is from studying. I have had little practical experience in
the language.\"

\"But it sounds very good to me.\" He reverted to German. \"I didn\'t
expect you to sound like a native speaker.\"

"Well, I do have an accent."

"Who doesn't? Why did you study it?"

Judith thought for a moment. "A good question; not for practical
reasons, I fear. It's just so beautiful."

"I see, and which authors do you prefer?"

A loaded question? But she was prepared: "I like Jack London, but
Steinbeck is a better writer."

"Ah -- *Of Mice and Men*?"

She smiled for the first time. "Oh yes, and so real, I mean the social
conditions he described."

"Hmm, well, one reason is as good as another. And I see from your
records that your Russian is fluent" he said in Russian.

"It is," she answered in the same language. "I had Russian teachers in
school."

He may have been thinking of asking which Russian writers she preferred,
but if so, decided not to. "I have a job for you, Judith,\" Wolff said.
He put three heaping spoonfuls of sugar in his cup and drank it down in
one gulp.

\"In the west, Herr Direktor?\" she asked.

\"Yes, my dear, in the west.\" He went to his desk and pushed a button.

\"Ja, Herr Direktor?\" Frau Schmidt answered.

\"Is Herr Cornelius there?\"

\"Ja, Herr Direktor\"

\"Send him in, please.\" He stood facing the door, which opened
immediately and a young, tall, well-dressed man entered in an army
lieutenant\'s uniform. He was handsome, too handsome to trust, Judith
thought. He stood ramrod straight before Wolff: "*Guten Morgen, Kamerad
Direktor Wolff*". Wolff smiled and held out his hand. The other took it,
but did not return the smile.

"Now I must introduce you, Stasi style", Wolff said ironically. "Frau
Cornelius, meet Lt. Cornelius." Both young people stared at Wolff,
speechless. He had expected that reaction, and played his histrionic
hand to the hilt. "I must apologize for springing this on you so
formally, especially since you, Frau Cornelius, have never heard your
new name before. But please, let's relax and sit here." He indicated a
couch and easy chairs in the corner of his office. They both hurried to
occupy single chairs. "Would you like another cup of coffee, Frau
Cornelius?" Judith nodded and Wolff pressed the intercom button on his
desk and told Frau Schmidt to bring three more coffees. "And please
don't be so stingy with the sugar, Frau Schmidt." He then sat on the
couch, crossed his legs, spread his arms over the back of the couch and
smiled at them.

When the coffee appeared, almost immediately, and Frau Schmidt had left
the room, Wolff became serious. "Here's what we plan for you," he said.
"You will receive the necessary training in spycraft and, much easier,
the travel agency business. This will take about three months. Then a
few weeks in Moscow, theoretically for more training, but in reality for
indoctrination and their blessing. How\'s your Russian, by the way?" he
asked, looking at the young man.

"*Gut*, but could be better," the new husband said.

"It will be." Wolf observed them as he offered the real cigarettes,
which they accepted, the lieutenant with trembling fingers.

"When you return from Moscow where, according to your story, you met and
fell in love, you will get married. Everyone, your families, friends,
enemies in case you have any, must be convinced of all this. So you will
look happy, whether you are or not. I sincerely hope that you are, for
it would be easier for all concerned, especially you.

"Once you are deemed ready", he continued, "you will defect to West
Berlin and report to an American military post. This is a logical step
for one of our army officers. You always feel more at home with your
peers. Isn't that true, lieutenant?" He didn't wait for an answer. "We
don't want you in the hands of West German intelligence or the CIA.
American Military Intelligence is stupid and amateurish, which ours is
also, by the way; that's why we don't let them handle anything of
importance. But the Americans are worse, their various intelligence
services compete with each other and very often one doesn't know what
the others are doing or what they know. Army intelligence is the worst,
mostly because they rotate officers and enlisted men in and out, so that
once they have gained sufficient experience to almost know what they're
doing, they're gone. There are individual exceptions to this, but they
are few and far between and only handle important items and people. You
will not be deemed important enough." He drank his coffee slowly but
completely and looked at them. "Are you following me so far?"

Both nodded, somewhat hesitantly.

"Good. They will interrogate you, but courteously. You will be treated
as guests, VIPs even, most probably at their interrogation center, Camp
King, in Oberursel, just outside Frankfurt. You will be cooperative, as
behooves defectors seeking a new life in the consumer society."

"What should I tell them, Kamerad Direktor?" Cornelius said.

"Everything. Unless you know some deep dark secrets about us, you won't
be able to tell them anything they don't already know. They will want to
know about Order of Battle of course, but especially morale. They will
question you about our army's morale. You will tell the truth." Wolff
looked at Cornelius, waiting for his reaction, which gave the latter the
courage to give it.

"Morale isn't really very good, Herr Direktor."

"You don't say," Wolff said, unsurprised. "That's what you will tell
them then. They already know it anyway. You must tell the truth about
such things so you will not be under suspicion. Understood?"

"Jawohl!"

"Good. Now you, Mrs. Cornelius, they will interrogate you as well, but
not with much interest. You have only to confirm your husband's account
and tell them about life in East Germany in general, the truth. We have
invented an employment for you, in the travel department of the foreign
ministry, which will provide a rationale for taking up the same
profession in Argentina."

"Argentina?"

"Yes, your penultimate destination. But we'll go into that tomorrow. I
have an appointment with the Kamerad Chairman now, and don't want to
keep him waiting for more than is his due." He stood up. The others
followed suit. "Until tomorrow, then, at nine o'clock here."

"In the morning?" Cornelius asked.

"In the evening," Wolff replied. "You may go now. I suggest you get to
know each other." He pressed the intercom button and told Frau Schmidt
to call the Chairman's office and advise that he was on his way. He
stopped halfway to the door. "By the way, I almost forgot." He grinned.
"This is all voluntary of course. I\'m afraid I assumed that you would
both agree. So please think it over and let me know what you decide
tomorrow. And\...this meeting was secret, top secret in fact, so you are
not to mention it to anyone.

As they approached the elevator the lieutenant said to Judith, "The
paternostro only holds one at a time, not a good way to get to know each
other. So perhaps we could have a drink somewhere, or\..."

"We should decide first," Judith interrupted him. She felt herself
blush. "I mean\...you know\..."

Yes, of course, I just thought\..." He held his hand out with a slight
bow. She shook it and jumped into a paternostro box as it passed. She
saw his pressed trousers and gleaming black shoes as she descended. "The
next time I see him I will be dressed appropriately," she thought as she
glanced down at her woolen stockings.

Back at her desk she ignored the papers and stared into the distance,
her heart pounding.

"Is something wrong, Judith?" Staudenmaier asked her.

"What?\...Oh no, it\'s just that\...that I must leave early today. Is
that all right, Dr. Staudenmaier?"

Staudenmaier had asked her several times to call him Hans, but she could
never bring herself to do it. He liked to think of himself as fatherly,
or at least avuncular, but actually, despite the thirty years difference
in their ages, he was quite in love with her. "Yes, of course, but\..."
She had already picked up her purse and was heading back to the
paternostro before he could finish the sentence.

Continued in the next issue of SCR - or sooner.

This book may be purchased from Amazon in paperback or kindle: [Love in the Life of Spies](https://www.amazon.com/Love-Spies-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/1948302519)

[Forward](https://souterncrossreview.org/150/love-life-spies-forward.html)
