![](magic-mound-3.jpg){class="a"}

# The Magic Mound

## by Frank Thomas Smith

### Chapter 6

### The Queen asks the boys to rescue Mireya

Queen Mamara continued to relate the history of Maxa. \"The first
children grew up and had children of their own. These also grew up and
had children until the community was about as big as it is today. Alam
had prepared the Vidaluz according to Light\'s instructions, but he did
not drink it himself. He was already very old and blind, a process which
the Vitaluz cannot reverse. He was also sad and lonely without Ara and
did not want to go on living. So he taught the Vidaluz recipe to his
oldest son, Alaram.

\"The same Alaram,\" Divino asked, \"or his father?\"

\"The same Alaram. He was still a young man or course, because of the
vidaluz.\"

\"Oh.\" Divino was feeling very sleepy.

\"Then Alam died - but no one else did, except for a man who died by
accident when he cut himself in the forest with a axe. He was alone and
couldn\'t stop the bleeding. Fatal accidents can happen. But we did not
become ill or grow older, except for those who were children then and
wanted to grow up. Life went on peacefully for many seasons until one
day I, Alaram\'s wife, asked him to tell me the secret recipe. I was
concerned that if anything happened to him, a fatal accident, the secret
of making vidaluz would be lost forever. He didn\'t want to tell me. I
was hurt and angry, as you can well understand. Why should he refuse to
tell me, his own wife?\" She glared at Sergio as she said this and
seemed angry at *him*. Finally he did tell me, but in a dream. Waking he
would never have told me the secret.\"

The boys waited, not daring to say anything.

\"Not long after, Mireya came to us.\"

Sergio was relieved that she had at last mentioned Mireya and he would
not have to ask about her.

\"Mireya is a girl from your world who came to us on the magic mound as
you did. She was very beautiful.\"

\"She *is* very beautiful,\" Mara corrected her.

\"Yes, that is what I meant.\" Mamara sipped from her gourd. She was no
longer angry. \"She is dark brown like a nut and has black curly hair
that feels like the forest floor.\" She cupped her hands in the air as
if she were touching Mireya\'s hair. \"And wonderful purple sculpted
lips.\"

\"We tried all out lip colors on her,\" Mara said, \"but none could
improve her natural color.\"

\"Large black almond-shaped eyes...\" Mamara started to say, but Mara
blurted out: \"The men took her with them when they left.\" She looked
quickly at her mother, who clenched her hands into small fists.

\"The treated us like servants, we had to wait on them, take their
orders, abide by their decisions and keep silent. Finally we rebelled.
We wanted only to be equal. The men, especially Alaram, refused to
accept this, and they left.\"

\"Where did they go?\" Sergio asked.

\"To Maxalabora. I\...\" The boys were surprised to see tears form in
Mamara\'s eyes and spill over the lower lids. She rose and walked
quickly across the garden and into the palace.

\"What\'s wrong with the queen?\" Divino asked Mara, who shook her head
and remained silent.

Divino was restless and tired. \"What is there to do around here?\" he
asked, but received no answer. \"Maybe we should go back to the magic
mound, Sergio. Dona Ute is going to be real worried about us.\"

\"You will wait here,\" Mara said curtly, so they waited.

Before long Mamara returned. She smiled, touched both boys on the cheek
and sat down. \"Where was I?\" She asked, not expecting an answer. But
Divino, who took questions seriously because he asked so many himself,
reminded her: \"You said the men took Mireya with them when they left.\"

\"Yes, because Alaram knew that I loved her.\"

\"Did they *kidnap* her? Divino asked. He was also familiar with that
particular crime as he had been kidnapped himself once when he was a
baby. He had only a vague but terrible memory of it. The woman who did
it abandoned him in front of a church and Dona Ute said that perhaps she
was not really bad, only sick.

Queen Mamara looked at Sergio. \"I want you to find her and bring her
back to me.\"

The boys were astonished. Divino opened his mouth and didn\'t close it
until an insect tried to fly in.

\"How can we do that?\" Sergio was finally able to ask.

\"You are like her, very clever, more clever than I or even Alaram.
Every time he wants to do something he asks Light first. You must go to
Maxalabora and find her. I don\'t know how, but you will find a way.\"

\"You mean *rescue* her?\" Divino exclaimed.

\"Exactly. Rescue her from Alaram and his men.\"

\"How many men are there?\" Sergio wanted to know.

\"As many as there are of us.\"

\"How many is that?\"

Mamara looked at Mara for help, who said, \"Mireya counted us once. She
said we were twenty-four women and twenty-four men.\"

Sergio didn\'t know what to answer. It seemed unlikely to him that two
small boys could rescue Mireya from twenty-four men. But he wanted time
to think, so he told Queen Mamara that they were very tired and asked if
they could answer her tomorrow.

The queen smiled. \"Why of course. How thoughtless of me, you must be
exhausted.\" Then, to her daughter: \"Mara, please show them to their
room.\"

Chapter 7

The Decision

Sergio and Divino lay in hammocks in the room assigned to them in the
palace. They were both very tired, but the day\'s excitement kept them
awake.

\"Sergio?\"

\"Yes?\"

\"There are no children here either.\"

\"I know. If there are no men there can\'t be any children.\"

\"Why not?\"

\"Children need fathers, you know that.\"

\"Yes, but...\"

\"The children who were here must have grown up since the men left,\"
Sergio concluded, though he was less sure than he sounded.

\"Oh.\" Divino usually accepted whatever Sergio told him.

\"Are we going to rescue Mireya, Sergio?\"

\"Do you want to try?\"

\"I\'d like to, but we\'d have to go a long way, wouldn\'t we? And what
if Alaram catches us?\" Divino leaned towards his brother and his
hammock tipped over, dumping him on the floor. Sergio laughed. \"You
still fall out of bed, how are you going to rescue Mireya?\"

\"Well, I wouldn\'t try it alone.\"

\"If they catch us we may never get home,\" Sergio said. \"But Queen
Mamara won\'t let us go if we don\'t at least try.\"

\"So we\'ll have to try, right Sergio?\"

\"We can\'t leave Mireya here as a captive either. I mean that should be
our motive.\"

\"What if we rescue her and Queen Mamara doesn\'t let us go anyway?\"

\"If we can rescue Mireya from Alaram, we can certainly escape from
Queen Mamara.\" Sergio reflected for a few moments. \"Maybe Mireya
doesn\'t want to come back here. Maybe she wants to go home to Brazil.\"

\"What would we do then?\"

\"We\'d take her with us to Brazil.\"

\"We\'d have to find the magic mound to do that. Do you remember where
it is, Sergio?\"

\"No, but it\'s on the map, which we\'ll need to get to Maxalabora.\"

\"So queen Mamara will have to give us the map.\"

\"Of course.\"

\"When are we going to start?\"

\"As soon as possible, I suppose. We\'re going to need provisions for
the journey. I didn\'t see any horses around, did you?\"

\"No, no minivans either.\"

\"Very funny. It looks like we\'ll have to carry everything and it\'s
going to be a long walk.

\"How long?\"

\"I don\'t know. Distance and time don\'t seem to mean anything to
them.\"

\"Why not, Sergio?\"

Sergio thought for a while, then said, \"Well, if you were going to live
forever, those things would be unimportant to you too.\"

\"It might not be so far,\" Divino said hopefully.

\"Don\'t think this is going to be easy, Divino, because it isn\'t.\"

\"It\'s kind of like the fairly tales Dona Ute tells us, isn\'t it?\"

Sergio had been thinking the same thing. \"Yes, but remember that the
heroes never have it easy.\"

\"But they always win the princess and the kingdom.\"

\"Don\'t be silly, Divino.\" Sergio leaned over and blew out the candle
near his hammock. \"This isn\'t a fairy tale, it\'s real. Now blow out
your candle and go to sleep. And try not to fall out while you\'re...\"
It was too late. While leaning over to blow out his candle Divino upset
his hammock again and fell out. He sat on the floor rubbing his backside
while Sergio giggled under his tara-blanket. Divino blew out his candle
and climbed back into the hammock.

\"Don\'t forget to say your prayers,\" Sergio told him.

\"I won\'t. Good night, Sergio.\"

\"Good night, Divino.\"

Continued in the next issue

[Chapter 5](https://southerncrossreview.org/150/magic-mound-5.html)

The complete book is available from Amazon in paperback and kindle:

[The Magic Mound](https://www.amazon.com/Magic-Mound-Frank-Thomas-Smith/dp/194830225X)

and in Spanish at:

[La lomita mágica](https://www.amazon.com/lomita-mágica-Literatura-infantil-Spanish-ebook/dp/B0948D1XSP)
