# The Gospel of Thomas


![](image-thomas.gif){class="a"}

These are the secret sayings which the living Yeshúa spoke and Didymos
Judas Thomas recorded. (Jer 23:18, Mt 13:34, Lk 1:1, 8:10, 10:21, Jn
21:25, Rev/Ap 1:17;

**1.  And he** {**says**¹}**: Whoever finds the interpretation of
these sayings shall not taste death.** (Isa 25:8, Lk 9:27, Jn 5:24,
8:51; this is apparently an introductory logion quoting Thomas
himself, included \[like Jn 21:24\] by his own disciples, since it
speaks of the following as a *collection* of sayings; ¹throughout the
Greek fragments of Thomas, '[x]{.underline} says' is in the present
tense--- see Henry Barclay Swete \[1897\], Recent Scholarly Comments

**2.  Yeshúa says: Let him who seeks not cease seeking until he finds,
and when he finds he shall be troubled, and when he has been troubled
he shall marvel and he shall reign over everyone**¹ {**and find
repose**}(¹or over the totality ; Gen 1:26, Dan 7:27, Lk 1:29,
22:25-30!, Rev/Ap 1:6, 3:21, 20:4, 22:5; =Clement of Alexandria,
[*Stromata*](http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0210.htm) II.9 & V.14;

**3.  Yeshúa says: If those who would lead you, say to you: Behold,
the Sovereignty is in the sky** **!, then the birds of the sky would
precede you. If they say to you: It is in the sea!, then the fish**
{**of the sea**} **would precede you. But the Sovereignty** {**of
God**} **exists within you and it exists without you.** {**Those who
come to recognize** **themselves shall find it, and when you come to
recognize yourselves**} **then you shall know that you are the Sons of
the Living Father. Yet if you do not recognize yourselves then you are
impoverished and you are poverty.** (Gen 6:2, Dt 30:11-14, Hos 1:10,
Mal 2:10, Lk 11:41, 17:21, Plato\'s
[*Philebus*](http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/philebus.html) 48c, 63c;)

**4.  Yeshúa says: The person old in days will not hesitate to ask a
little child of seven days concerning the place of life--- and he
shall live. For many who are first shall become last,** {**and the
last first**}**. And they shall become a single unity.** (Gen 2:2-3,
17:12, Mt 11:25-26, 18:1-6 & 10-14, Lk 2:21;)

**5.  Yeshúa says: Recognize Him in front of thy face, and what is
hidden from thee shall be revealed to thee. For there is nothing
concealed which shall not be manifest,** {**and nothing buried that
shall not be raised**¹}.(=Mt 10:26; in his scriptural
*Traditions* the Apostle Matthias \[Ac 1:21-26\] relates Christ\'s
logion: 'Wonder at what is in front of you'**---** quoted by Clement
of Alexandria, *[Stromata](http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0210.htm)*
II.9; ¹anti-Gnostic ;)

**6.  His Disciples ask him,**¹ **they say to him: How do thou want us
to fast, and how shall we pray? And how shall we give alms, and what
diet shall we maintain? \|\| Yeshúa says: Do not lie**²**, and do not
practice what you hate**³**--- for everything** **is revealed before
the face of the sky. For there is nothing concealed that shall not be
manifest, and there is nothing covered that shall remain without being
exposed.**³ª (Lev 19:11, Th 14;
[asyndeton](http://humanities.byu.edu/rhetoric/Figures/A/asyndeton.htm),
or omission of conjunctions, characterizing Semitic languages but not
Greek or Coptic, thus signaling an underlying Semitic source-text---
Matthew Black, *An Aramaic Approach to the Gospels and Acts*:
'Asyndeton is, on the whole, contrary to the spirit of the Greek
language \... but is highly characteristic of Aramaic'; ²thus Socrates
in the [*Phaedo*](http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/phaedo.html): 'False
words \... inflict the soul with evil'; ³cp. Confucius,
[*Analects*](http://classics.mit.edu/Confucius/analects.html) 8.15:
'Is there any one word \... which could be adopted as a lifelong rule
of conduct?\... Is not Sympathy the word? Do not to others what you
would not like yourself'; ³ªthus the
[Qur'án](http://etext.virginia.edu/koran.html) 27.75: 'There is
nothing concealed in the heaven and the earth, but it is in a clear
book';) 

**7.  Yeshúa says: Blest be the lion which the human eats--- and
the lion shall become human. And accursed be the human which the lion
eats--- and the** \[**human**\] **shall become** \[**lion**\].


**8.  And he says: The** \[**Sovereignty**\] **is like a wise
fisherman who cast his net into the sea. He drew it up from the sea
full of small fish. Among them he found a large good fish. That wise
fisherman, he threw all the small fish back into the sea,**¹ **he
chose the large fish without hesitation. Whoever has ears to hear, let
him hear!** (¹asyndeton; =Mt 13:47-48;)

**9.  Yeshúa says: Behold, the sower came forth--- he filled his hand,
he threw. Some indeed fell upon the road--- the birds came, they
gathered them. Others fell on the bedrock--- and they did not take
root down into the soil, and did not sprout grain skyward. And others
fell among the thorns--- they choked the seed, and the worm ate them.
And others fell upon the good earth--- and it produced good fruit up
toward the sky, it bore 60-fold and 120-fold.** (multiple asyndeta; Mt
13:18-23, =Mk 4:3-9;)

**10.  Yeshúa says: I have cast fire upon the world** **--- and
behold, I guard it until it is ablaze.** (Lk 12:49;)

**11.  Yeshúa says: This sky shall pass away, and the one above it
shall pass away.** (I-Ki 8:27!, Isa 65:17, Rev/Ap 21:1) **And the dead
are not alive, and the living shall not die. In the days when you
consumed the dead, you transformed it to life--- when you come into
the Light, what will you do? On the day when you were united, you
became separated--- yet when you have become separated, what will you
do?** (Mt 24:35, Ph 86!;)

**12.  The Disciples say to Yeshúa: We know that thou shall go away
from us. Who is it that shall be Rabbi** **over us? \|\| Yeshúa says
to them: In the place that you have come, you shall go to Jacob the
Righteous** **, for whose sake the sky and earth come to be.**
(apparently a post-resurrection dialog; Mk 6:3, Jn 7:5, Ac 1:14,
12:17, Jas 1:1;)

**13.  Yeshúa says to his Disciples: Make a comparison to me, and tell
me whom I resemble.** (Isa 46:5) **\|\| Shimon Kefa** **says to him:
Thou art like a righteous angel. \|\| Matthew** **says to him: Thou
art like a philosopher** **of the heart. \|\| Thomas says to him:
Teacher, my mouth will not at all be capable of saying whom thou art
like! \|\| Yeshúa says: I\'m not thy teacher, now that thou have
drunk, thou have become drunken from the bubbling spring which I have
measured out. And he takes him, he withdraws, he speaks three words to
him:**

**hyh) r#) hyh)**\
***ahyh    ashr    ahyh***\
**I-Am  Who  I-Am**

**Now when Thomas comes to his comrades, they inquire of him: What did
Yeshúa say to thee? \|\| Thomas says to them: If I tell you even one
of the words which he spoke to me, you will take up stones to cast at
me--- and fire will come from the stones to consume you.** (the Name
does not appear in the papyrus, but can be inferred; Ex 3:14, Lev
24:16, Mk 14:62, Lk 6:40, Jn 4:14, 15:1, Th 61b, 77, cp. [Odes of St.
Solomon](http://www.goodnewsinc.net/othbooks/odesolmn.html) 11:6-9---
'I drank and was inebriated with the living water that does not die';
note also the infinite gematria of Ex 3:14159263\...;)

**14.  Yeshúa says to them: If you fast**¹**, you shall beget
transgression** **for yourselves.**² **And if you pray**¹**, you shall
be condemned. And if you give alms**¹**, you shall cause evil to your
spirits. And when you go into any land to travel in the regions, if
they receive you then eat what they set before you and heal the sick
among them. For what goes into your mouth will not defile you--- but
rather what comes out of your mouth, that is what will defile you.**
(¹in public; ²cp. Confucius,
[*Analects*](http://classics.mit.edu/Confucius/analects.html) 15.31:
'I once spent all day thinking without taking food and all night
thinking without going to bed, but I found that I gained nothing from
it; it would have been better for me to have spent the time in
learning'; Isa 58:6-9, Mk 7:14-23!, Mt 6:1-6 & 16-18, Lk 18:1!, =Lk
10:8-9, Th 6, 95, 104, Ph 74;)

**15.  Yeshúa says: When you see him who was not born of woman,
prostrate yourselves upon your faces and worship him--- he is your
Father.** (Josh 5:14, Lk 17:16, Th 46!, 101!;)

**16.  Yeshúa says: People perhaps think that I have come to cast
peace upon the world, and they do not know that I have come to cast
conflicts upon the earth--- fire, sword, war** **.** (Isa 66:15-16,
Joel 2:30-31, Zeph 3:8, Mal 4:1, Th 10) **For there shall be five in a
house--- three shall be against two and two against three, the father
against the son and the son against the father. And they shall stand
as solitaries.** (=Mic 7:6, =Lk 12:49-53;)

**17.  Yeshúa says: I shall give to you what eye has not seen and what
ear has not heard and what hand has not touched and what has not
arisen in the mind of mankind.** (Isa 64:4;)

**18.  The Disciples say to Yeshúa: Tell us how our end shall be.**
(Ps 39:4) **\|\| Yeshúa says: Have you then discovered the origin**
**, so that you inquire about the end? For at the place where the
origin is, there shall be the end. Blest be he who shall stand at the
origin--- and he shall know the end, and he shall not taste death.**
(Lk 20:38, Th 1;)

**19.  Yeshúa says: Blest be he who was before he came into being. If
you become Disciples to me and heed my sayings, these stones shall
serve you. For you have five trees** **in paradise, which in summer
are unmoved and in winter their leaves do not fall--- whoever is
acquainted with them shall not taste death.** (the five senses?!; Ps
1:3, Th 1, 18, Tr 28;)

**20.  The Disciples say to Yeshúa: Tell us what the Sovereignty of
the Heavens** **is like. \|\| He says to them: It resembles a mustard
seed, smaller than all** (**other**) **seeds--- yet when it falls on
the tilled earth, it produces a great plant and becomes shelter for
the birds of the sky.** (=Mk 4:30-32;)

**21.  Mariam** **says to Yeshúa: Whom are thy Disciples like? \|\| He
says: They are like little children who are sojourning in a field
which is not theirs. When the owners of the field come, they will say:
Leave our field to us! They take off their clothing in front of them
in order to yield it to them and to give back their field to them.
Therefore I say, if the householder ascertains that the thief is
coming, he will be alert before he arrives and will not allow him to
dig thru into the house of his domain to carry away his belongings.
Yet you, beware of the system** **--- gird up your loins with great
strength lest the bandits find a way to reach you, for they will find
the advantage which you anticipate. Let there be among you a person of
awareness--- when the fruit ripened, he came quickly with his sickle
in his hand,**¹ **he reaped it. Whoever has ears to hear, let him
hear!** (¹asyndeton; =Mt 24:43-44;)

**22.  Yeshúa sees little children who are being suckled. He says to
his Disciples: These little children who are being suckled are like
those who enter the Sovereignty. \|\| They say to him:  Shall we thus
by becoming little children enter the Sovereignty? \|\| Yeshúa says to
them: When you make the two one, and you make the inside as the
outside and the outside as the inside and the above as the below, and
if you establish the male with the female as a single unity so that
the man will not be masculine and the woman not be feminine, when you
establish** \[**an eye**\] **in the  place of an eye and a hand in the
place of a hand and a foot in the place of a foot and an image** **in
the place of an image--- then shall you enter** \[**the
Sovereignty**\]**.** (Mt 18:3; ; =Clement of Alexandria,
[*Stromata*](http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0210.htm) III.13; cp.
[Odes of St. Solomon](http://www.goodnewsinc.net/othbooks/odesolmn.html) 34:5, 'The
likeness of what is below, is  that which is above--- for everything
is above; what is below is nothing but the  delusion of those who are
without knowledge'; also Socrates in Plato\'s
[*Phaedrus*](http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext99/phdrs10.zip),
'Beloved Pan, and whatever other gods be present, grant me to be
handsome in inward soul, and that the outside and the inside be one';)

**23.  Yeshúa says: I shall choose you, one from a thousand and two
from ten thousand--- and they shall stand as a single unity.** (Dt
32:30, Job 33:23, Ecc 7:28;)

**24.  His Disciples say: Show us thy place, for it is compulsory for
us to seek it. \|\| He says to them: Whoever has ears, let him hear!
Within a person of light there is light, and he illumines the entire
world. When he does not shine, there is darkness.** (Mt 5:14-16, Jn
13:36;)

**25.  Yeshúa says: Love thy Brother as thy soul, protect him as the
pupil of thine eye.** (asyndeton; Dt 32:10, I-Sam 18:1, Ps 17:8, Jn
13:34-35; thus the [*I Ching*](http://www.iging.com/intro/introduc.htm), hexagram 63, After
Completion: 'Indifference is the root of all evil';)

**26.  Yeshúa says: The mote which is in thy Brother\'s eye thou
see--- but the plank that is in thine own eye thou see not. When thou
cast the plank out of thine own eye, then shall thou see clearly to
cast the mote out of thy Brother\'s eye.** (=Mt 7:3-5;)

**27. ** (**Yeshúa says:**) **Unless you fast from the system, you
shall not find the Sovereignty** {**of God**}**. Unless you keep the**
(**entire**) **week**¹ **as Sabbath** **, you shall not behold the
Father.** (Mk 1:13, Jn 5:19!; =Clement of Alexandria,
[*Stromata*](http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0210.htm) III.15; ¹here
'Sabbath' = 'week' as in Lev 23:15-16--- see
P133
and Paterson Brown, 'The Sabbath and the Week in Thomas 27', *Novum Testamentum* 1992;)

**28.  Yeshúa says: I stood in the midst of the world, and incarnate**
**I appeared to them.**¹ **I found them all drunk, I found none among
them athirst. And my soul was grieved for the sons of men, for they
are blind in their hearts and do not see that empty they have come
into the world and that empty they are destined to come forth again
from the world.** (Ecc 6:15)**However, now they are drunk--- when they
have shaken off their wine, then shall they rethink** .
(¹anti-Gnostic!, Jn 1:14; this appears to be a post-resurrection
saying;)

**29.  Yeshúa says: If the flesh has come to be because of spirit, it
is a marvel--- yet if spirit because of the body, it would be a marvel
among marvels. But I marvel at this, how this great wealth has
inhabited this poverty.** (Ph 23;)

**30.  Yeshúa says: Where there are three gods, they are** {**godless.
Where there is only one, I say that**} **I myself am with him.**
{**Raise the stone and there you shall find me, cleave the wood and
there am I.**} (see e.g. [The Letter of Aristeas](http://wesley.nnu.edu/noncanon/ot/pseudo/aristeas.htm)
15-16; cleaving the wood could be seen as a metaphor for the
crucifixion, removing the stone for the resurrection;)

**31.  Yeshúa says: No oracle** **is accepted in his own village, no
physician heals those who know him.** (asyndeton; =Mk 6:4;)

**32.  Yeshúa says: A city being built upon a high mountain and
fortified cannot fall nor can it be hidden.** (Mt 5:14;)

**33.  Yeshúa says: What thou shall hear in thy ear proclaim to other
ears from your rooftops. For no one kindles a lamp and sets it under a
basket nor puts it in a hidden place, but rather it is placed upon the
lampstand so that everyone who comes in and goes out will see its
light.** (=Mt 5:15, =10:27, =Mk 4:21;)

**34.  Yeshúa says: If a blind person leads a blind person, both
together fall into a pit.** (=Mt 15:14;)

**35.  Yeshúa says: It is impossible for anyone to enter the house of
the strong to take it by force, unless he binds his hands--- then he
will ransack his house.** (Isa 49:24-25, =Mk 3:27;)

**36.  Yeshúa says: Be not anxious in the morning about the evening
nor in the evening about the morning,** {**neither for your**
\[**food**\] **that you shall eat nor for** \[**your garments**\]
**that you shall wear. You are much superior to the**
\[**windflowers**\] **which neither comb** (**wool**) **nor**
\[**spin**\] (**thread**)**. When you have no clothing, what do**
\[**you wear**\]**? Or who can increase your stature? He himself shall
give to you your garment.**} (garment = imagery?!: see Th 37, 84, Ph
26, 107, 'Angel and Image', as well as the
ancient and delightful 'Hymn of the Pearl'; =Mt 6:25;)

**37.  His Disciples say: When will thou appear to us, and when shall
we behold thee? \|\| Yeshúa says: When you take off your garments
without being ashamed, and take your garments and place them under
your feet to tread on them as the little children do--- then**
\[**shall you behold**\] **the Son of the Living-One, and you shall
not fear.** (Gen 2:25, 3:7, Isa 19:2; =Clement of Alexandria,
*[Stromata](http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0210.htm)* III.13;
garments = images?!; this appears to be a post-resurrection dialog;)

**38.  Yeshúa says: Many times have you yearned to hear these sayings
which I speak to you, and you have no one else from whom to hear them.
There will be days when you will seek me but you shall not find me.**
(Prov 1:28, Lk 17:22;)

**39.  Yeshúa says: The clergy** **and the theologians** **have
received the keys of recognition, but they have hidden them. They did
not enter, nor did they permit those to enter who wished to. Yet
you--- become astute as serpents and pure as doves.** (Mt 5:20,
23:1-39, =Lk 11:52, =Mt 10:16;)

**40.  Yeshúa says: A vine has been planted without the Father, and as
it is not viable it shall be pulled up by its roots and destroyed.**
(Mt 15:13;)

**41.  Yeshúa says: Whoever has in his hand, to him shall** (**more**)
**be given. And whoever does not have, from him shall be taken even
the trifle which he has.** (=Mt 13:12;)

**42.  Yeshúa says: Be passers-by** **.** (Mt 10:1-23, 28:19-20, Jn
16:28; thus [Matsuo Basho](http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/%7Ekohl/basho/), *Narrow Road to
the Interior*: 'Every day is a journey, and the journey itself is
home'; [Sylvia Plath](http://www.poets.org/poets/poets.cfm?prmID=11&CFID=3423452&CFTOKEN=13707215),
*Unabridged Journals*: 'I can only pass on. Something in me wants
more\.... There is still time to veer, to sally forth, knapsack on
back, for unknown hills over which ··· only the wind knows what lies';
[Pedro Chamizo Domínguez](http://www.ensayistas.org/consejo/chamizo/),
*Metaphor and Knowledge*: 'Man is not usually satisfied with what is
known in each moment, but rather in every moment what is understood
and established as true appears to him insufficient';)

**43.  His Disciples say to him: Who art thou, that thou say these
things to us? \|\|** (**Yeshúa says to them:**) **From what I say to
you, you do not recognize who I be, but rather you have become as the
Jews--- for they love the tree but hate its fruit, and they love the
fruit but hate the tree.** (Mt 12:33, Jn 4:22;)

**44.  Yeshúa says: Whoever vilifies the Father, it shall be forgiven
him. And whoever vilifies the Son, it shall be forgiven him. Yet
whoever vilifies the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him---
neither on earth nor in heaven.** (=Mk 3:28-29;)

**45.  Yeshúa says: They do not harvest grapes from thorns, nor do
they gather figs from thistles--- for they give no fruit. A good
person brings forth goodness out of his treasure. A bad person brings
forth wickedness** **out of his evil treasure which is in his heart,
and he speaks oppressively--- for out of the abundance of the heart he
brings forth wickedness.** (I-Sam 24:13, =Mt 7:16, =12:34-35;)

**46.  Yeshúa says: From Adam** **until John the Baptist** **there is
among those born of women none more exalted than John the Baptist---
so that his eyes shall not be broken. Yet I have said that whoever
among you becomes childlike shall know the Sovereignty, and he shall
become more exalted than John.** (Th 15, =Lk 7:28;)

**47.  Yeshúa says: It is impossible for a person to mount two horses
or to stretch two bows, and a slave cannot serve two masters** **---
otherwise he will honor the one and offend the other. No person drinks
vintage** **wine and immediately desires to drink new wine, and they
do not put new** (**wine**) **into old wineskins lest they burst, and
they do not put vintage wine into new wineskins lest it sour. They do
not sew an old patch on a new garment because there would come a
split.** (Job 32:19, =Lk 5:36-39, =16:13;)

**48.  Yeshúa says: If two make peace with each other in this one
house, they shall say to the mountain: Be moved!--- and it shall be
moved.** (=Mt 17:20, =18:19;)

**49.  Yeshúa says: Blest be the solitary and chosen--- for you shall
find the Sovereignty. You have come from it, and unto it you shall
return.** (Jn 16:28; cp. Plotinus,
[*Enneads*](http://classics.mit.edu/Plotinus/enneads.1.first.html),
I.6.8: 'The Fatherland to us is there whence we have come, and there
is the Father';)

**50.  Yeshúa says: If they say to you: 'From whence do you come?',
say to them: 'We have come from the Light, the place where the Light
has originated thru himself--- he** \[**stood**\] **and he himself
appeared in their imagery.' If they say to you: 'Who are you?', say:
'We are his Sons and we are the chosen of the Living Father.' If they
ask you: 'What is the sign of your Father in you?', say to them: 'It
is movement with repose.'** (Lk 16:8, Jn 12:36, Th 28;)

**51.  His Disciples say to him: When will the repose of the dead
occur, and when will the New World come? \|\| He says to them: That
which you look for has already come, but you do not recognize it.**

**52.  His Disciples say to him: Twenty-four prophets** **proclaimed
in Israel, and they all spoke within thee. \|\| He says to them: You
have ignored the Living-One who is facing you, and you have spoken
about the dead.** (Th 5;)

**53.  His Disciples say to him: Is circumcision beneficial or not?
\|\| He says to them: If it were beneficial, their father would beget
them circumcised from their mother. But the true spiritual
circumcision has become entirely beneficial.**

**54.  Yeshúa says: Blest be the poor, for the Sovereignty of the
Skies is yours.** (Jas 2:5-7, =Lk 6:20; note that the Greek of Mt 5:3,
MAKARIOI OI PTWCOI TW PNEUMATI, can be read equally 'Blest the poor in
spirit' or 'Blest in spirit the poor'--- of which the latter makes
more sense, since the parallel at Lk 6:20&24 explicitly concerns
economic poverty/wealth rather than spiritual humility/pride;)

**55.  Yeshúa says: Whoever does not hate his father and his mother
will not be able to become a Disciple to me. And whoever does not hate
his brothers and his sisters and does not take up his own cross**¹
**in my way, will not become worthy of me.** (¹anti-Gnostic; =Lk
14:26-27;)

**56.  Yeshúa says: Whoever has recognized the system has found a
corpse--- and whoever has found a corpse, of him the system is not
worthy.** 

**57.  Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the Father is like a person who
has** \[**good**\] **seed. His enemy came by night,**¹ **he sowed a
weed among the good seed. The man did not permit them to pull up the
weed,**¹ **he says to them: Lest perhaps you go forth saying: 'We
shall pull up the weed', and you pull up the wheat along with it. For
on the day of harvest the weeds will appear--- they pull them and burn
them.** (¹asyndeton; II-Pt 3:15-17?!, =Mt 13:24-30;)

**58.  Yeshúa says: Blest be the person who has suffered--- he has
found the life.** (asyndeton; Mt 5:10-12, Jas 1:12, I-Pt 3:14; thus
Victor Hugo, [*Les Misérables*](http://sailor.gutenberg.org/etext94/lesms10.txt): 'To
have suffered, how good it is!';)

**59.  Yeshúa says: Behold the Living-One while you are alive, lest
you die and seek to perceive him and be unable to see.** (Ecc 12:1-8;)

**60. ** (**They see**) **a Samaritan** **carrying a lamb, entering
Judea. Yeshúa says to them: Why does he** (**take**) **the lamb with
him? \|\| They say to him: So that he may kill it and eat it. \|\| He
says to them: While it is alive he will not eat it, but only after he
kills it and it becomes a corpse. \|\| They say: Otherwise he will not
be able to do it. \|\| He says to them: You yourselves--- seek a place
for yourselves in repose, lest you become corpses and be eaten.** (Th
1; thus Thomas Mann, *The Magic Mountain*: 'The spiritual possibility
of finding salvation in repose';)

**61a.  Yeshúa says: Two will rest on a bed**°**--- the one shall die,
the other shall live.** (asyndeton; =Lk 17:34;)

**61b.  Salome** **says: Who art thou, man? As if** (**sent**) **by
someone, thou laid upon my bed** **and thou ate from my table.**¹
**\|\| Yeshúa says to her: I-Am he who is from equality. To me have
been given from the things of my Father. \|\|** (**Salome says:**)
**I\'m thy Disciple.**² **\|\|** (**Yeshúa says to her:**) **Thus I
say that whenever someone equalizes he shall be filled with light, yet
whenever he differentiates he shall be filled with darkness.**
(¹S-of-S 1:4; cp. Teresa of Ávila, [*The Interior Castle*](http://www.catholicfirst.com/TheFaith/CatholicClassics/StTeresa/castle/interiorcastle.htm),
VI.4.1: 'All is to desire to enjoy the Husband more,\... to be ardent
to mate with such a grand Lord and take him as Husband'; ²'thy
Disciple': Coptic tek. indicates a masculine possessive \[thy\] of
a feminine noun \[disciple\]--- see
P050)

**62.  Yeshúa says: I tell my mysteries to those** \[**who are worthy
of**\] **my mysteries. What thy right** (**hand**) **shall do, let not
thy left** (**hand**) **ascertain what it does.** (Mk 4:10-12, =Mt
6:3;)

**63.  Yeshúa says: There was a wealthy person who possessed much
money, and he said: I shall utilize my money so that I may sow and
reap and replant, to fill my storehouses with fruit so that I lack
nothing. This is what he thought in his heart--- and that night he
died. Whoever has ears, let him hear!** (=Lk 12:16-21;)

**64a.  Yeshúa says: A person had houseguests, and when he had
prepared the banquet he sent his slave to invite the guests. He went
to the first, he says to him: My master invites thee. He replied: I
have some business with some merchants, they are coming to me in the
evening, I shall go to place my orders with them--- I beg to be
excused from the banquet. He went to another, he says to him: My
master has invited thee. He replied to him: I have bought a house and
they require me for a day, I shall have no leisure time. He came to
another, he says to him: My master invites thee. He replied to him: My
comrade is to be married and I must arrange a feast, I shall not be
able to come--- I beg to be excused from the banquet. He went to
another, he says to him: My master invites thee. He replied to him: I
have bought a villa, I go to receive the rent, I shall not be able to
come--- I beg to be excused. The slave came, he said to his master:
Those whom thou have invited to the banquet have excused themselves.
The master said to his slave: Go out to the roads, bring those whom
thou shall find so that they may feast.** (multiple asyndeta; =Lk
14:16-23;)

**64b.** (**And he says:**) **Tradesmen and merchants shall not enter
the places of my Father.** (Ezek 27-28, Zeph 1:11, Zech 14:21, Jn
2:13-16, Rev/Ap 18:11-20;)

**65.  He says: A kind** **person had a vineyard. He gave it out to
tenants so that they would work it and he would receive its fruit from
them. He sent his slave so that the tenants would give to him the
fruit of the vineyard. They seized his slave, they beat him--- a
little longer and they would have killed him. The slave went, he told
it to his master. His master said: Perhaps** \[**they**\] **did not
recognize** \[**him**\]**. He sent another slave--- the tenants beat
him also. Then the owner sent his son. He said: Perhaps they will
respect my son. Since those tenants knew that he was the heir of the
vineyard, they seized him, they killed him. Whoever has ears, let him
hear!** (multiple asyndeta; =Mk 12:1-8;)

**66.  Yeshúa says: Show me the stone which the builders have
rejected--- it is the cornerstone.** (Isa 28:16, =Ps 118:22 ® Mt
21:42;)

**67.  Yeshúa says: Whoever knows everything but himself, lacks
everything.** (Th 3;)

**68.  Yeshúa says: Blest be you when you are hated and persecuted and
find no place there where you have been persecuted.** (Mt 5:10-12;)

**69a.  Yeshúa says: Blest be those who have been persecuted in their
heart--- these are they who have recognized the Father in truth.**
(*ibid*.;)

**69b. ** (**Yeshúa says:**) **Blest be the hungry, for the stomach of
him who desires shall be filled.** (Mt 5:6;)

**70.  Yeshúa says: When you bring forth that which is within you,
this that you have shall save you. If you do not have that within you,
this which you do not have within you will kill you.** (Lk 11:41!;)

**71.  Yeshúa says: I shall destroy** \[**this**\] **house, and no one
will be able to** \[**re**\]**build it.** (Mk 14:58, Jn 2:19;)

**72. ** \[**Someone says**\] **to him: Tell my brothers to divide the
possessions of my father with me. \|\| He says to him: Oh man, who
made me a divider? \|\| He turned to his Disciples,**¹ **he says to
them: I\'m not a divider, am I?** (¹asyndeton; Lk 12:13-14;)

**73.  Yeshúa says: The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the workers
are few. Yet beseech the Lord** **that he send workers into the
harvest.** (=Mt 9:37-38;)

**74.  He says: Lord, there are many around the reservoir, yet no one
in the reservoir.**

**75.  Yeshúa says: There are many standing at the door, but the
solitary are those who shall enter the Bridal-Chamber** **.** (Mt
9:15, 25:10, Th 16, 49;)

**76.  Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the Father is like a merchant
possessing a fortune, who found a pearl. That merchant was shrewd---
he sold the fortune, he bought the one pearl for himself. You
yourselves, seek for** \[**the treasure of his face**\]**, which
perishes not, which endures--- the place where no moth comes near to
devour nor worm ravages.** (multiple asyndeta; Ps 11:7, 17:15, =Mt
6:19-20, =13:44-46, =Lk 12:33;)

**77.  Yeshúa says: I-Am the Light who is above them all, I-Am the
All** **. All came forth from me and all return to me. Cleave wood,**¹
**there am I. Lift up the stone and there you shall find me.**
(¹asyndeton; Jn 8:12, Th 30 note; thus Lao Tzu, [*Tao Teh Ching*](http://www.nokama.com/tao/) 16: 'All things flourish, but each
one returns to its root,\... the eternal Tao'; and Victor Hugo, [*Les Misérables*](http://sailor.gutenberg.org/etext94/lesms10.txt): 'All
comes from light, and all returns to it';)

**78.  Yeshúa says: Why did you come out to the wilderness--- to see a
reed shaken by the wind? And to see a person dressed in plush
garments?** \[**Behold, your**\] **rulers and your dignitaries are
those who are clad in plush garments, and they shall not be able to
recognize the truth.** (=Mt 11:7-8;)


**79.  A woman from the multitude says to him: Blest be the womb which
bore thee, and the breasts which nursed thee! \|\| He says to**
\[**her**\]**: Blest be those who have heard the meaning** **of the
Father and have kept it in truth. For there shall be days when you
will say: Blest be the womb which has not conceived and the breasts
which have not nursed.** (Lk 1:42, 23:29, =11:27-28;)

**80.  Yeshúa says: Whoever has recognized the system has found the
body--- and whoever has found the body, of him the system is not
worthy.** (Th 56;)

**81.  Yeshúa says: Let whoever is enriched become sovereign, and let
whoever has power renounce it.**

**82.  Yeshúa says: Whoever is close to me is close to the fire, and
whoever is far from me is far from the Sovereignty.**

**83.  Yeshúa says: The images are manifest to mankind, and the Light
which is within them is hidden.** (Th 19)**He shall reveal himself in
the imagery of the Light of the Father--- and** (**yet**) **his image
is concealed by his Light.** (thus Victor Hugo, [*Les Misérables*](http://sailor.gutenberg.org/etext94/lesms10.txt): 'God is
behind all things, but all things hide God'; Ps 104:2!;)

**84. Yeshúa says: When you see your reflection, you rejoice.**¹ **Yet
when you perceive your images which have come into being in your
presence--- which neither die nor manifest** **--- to what extent will
they depend upon you?**² (this is the epistemological \[and thus
ontological\] hinge of the entire text; see Ps 139:16, Prov 20:24, Jn
5:19, Th 19, and 'Angel and
Image'; ¹thus Anton
Chekhov, 'Anna': 'When Anna \... in the enormous mirror saw the whole
of herself, illumined by countless lights, a feeling of joy awakened
in her soul'; ²cp. Chuang Chou \[4th century BC China\], *Chuang Tzu*
2: 'Joy, anger, grief, delight, worry, regret, fickleness,
inflexibility, modesty, volition, sincerity, insolence:\... without
them we would not exist, without us they have nothing to take hold
of;\... it would seem as though they have some True Master, and yet I
find no trace of him; he can act--- that is certain; yet I cannot see
his form; he has identity but no form';)

**85.  Yeshúa says: Adam came into existence from a great power and a
great wealth, and yet he did not become worthy of you. For if he had
been worthy,** \[**he would**\] **not** \[**have tasted**\] **death.**
(Th 1;)

**86.  Yeshúa says:** \[**The foxes have their dens**\] **and the
birds have** \[**their**\] **nests, yet the Son of Mankind has no
place to lay his head for rest.** (Dan 7:13-14, =Mt 8:20;)

**87.  Yeshúa says: Wretched be the body which depends upon**
(**another**) **body, and wretched be the soul which depends upon
their being together.**

**88.  Yeshúa says: The angels and the oracles shall come to you, and
they shall bestow upon you what is yours. And you yourselves, give to
them what is in your hands, and say among yourselves: On what day will
they come to receive what is theirs?** (Rev/Ap 21:17!;)

**89.  Yeshúa says: Why do you wash the outside of the chalice? Do you
not mind that He who creates the inside is also He who creates the
outside?** (Lk 11:39-41;)

**90.  Yeshúa says: Come unto me, for my yoga** **is natural** **and
my lordship is gentle--- and you shall find repose for yourselves.**
(Mt 11:28-30, Th 60;)

**91.  They say to him: Tell us who thou art, so that we may believe
in thee. \|\| He says to them: You scrutinize the face of the sky and
of the earth--- yet you do not recognize Him who is facing you, and
you do not know to inquire of Him at this moment.** (Th 5, 52, 76, 84,
=Lk 12:56;)

**92.  Yeshúa says: Seek and you shall find. But those things which
you asked me in those days, I did not tell you then. Now I wish to
tell them, and you do not inquire about them.** (=Mt 7:7-8; thus
Mencius, 4th century BC China: 'It is said, Seek and you will find it,
neglect and you will lose it';)

**93.** (**Yeshúa says:**) **Give not what is sacred to the dogs, lest
they throw it on the dungheap. Cast not the pearls to the swine, lest
they cause it to become** \[\...\]**.** (=Mt 7:6;9)

**94.  Yeshúa** \[**says:**\] **Whoever seeks shall find.** \[**And
whoever knocks,**\] **it shall be opened to him.** (=Mt 7:8;)

**95.** \[**Yeshúa says:**\] **If you have copper-coins,**¹**do not
lend at interest--- but rather give** \[**them**\] **to those from
whom you will not be repaid.** (Lk 6:30-36; ¹here in the bound codex
there is a single sheet puzzlingly blank on both sides;)

**96.  Yeshúa** \[**says**\]**: The Sovereignty of the Father is
like** \[**a**\] **woman,**¹ **she has taken a little yeast,**¹
**she** \[**has hidden**\] **it in dough,**¹ **she produced large
loaves of it. Whoever has ears, let him hear!** (¹asyndeta; =Mt 13:33;)

**97.  Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the** \[**Father**\] **is like
a woman who was carrying a jar full of grain. While she was walking**
\[**on a**\] **distant road, the handle of the jar broke, the grain
streamed out behind her onto the road. She did not know it, she had
noticed no accident. When she arrived in her house, she set the jar
down--- she found it empty.** (multiple asyndeta;)

**98.  Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty of the Father is like someone who
wishes to slay a prominent person. He drew forth his sword in his
house,**¹ **he thrust it into the wall in order to ascertain whether
his hand would prevail. Then he slew the prominent person.**
(¹asyndeton; Rev/Ap 1:16, 2:16!;)

**99.  His Disciples say to him: Thy brethren and thy mother are
standing outside. \|\| He says to them: Those here who practice the
desires of my Father--- these are my Brethren and my Mother. It is
they who shall enter the Sovereignty of my Father.** (Th 15, =Mt
3:31-35;)

**100.  They show Yeshúa a gold-coin, and they say to him: The agents
of Caesar extort tribute from us. \|\| He says to them: Give the
things of Caesar to Caesar, give the things of God to God, and give to
me what is mine.** (Rev/Ap 13:18 ¬ I-Ki 10:14?!; an extraordinary
gematria, indicating 666 as a *monetary* symbol; =Mt 22:16-21, Th 64b;)

**101. ** (**Yeshúa says:**) **Whoever does not hate his father and
his mother in my way, shall not be able to become a Disciple to me.
And whoever does** \[**not**\] **love his** \[**Father**\] **and his
Mother in my way, shall not be able to become a Disciple to me. For my
mother** \[**bore** **me**\]¹**, yet** \[**my**\] **true**²
\[**Mother**\] **gave me the life.** (Job 33:4; ¹the reconstruction
of this phrase in the papyrus;
²m.me = 'of truth' \[if me is feminine\] or 'of love' \[if it is
masculine\]--- here undetermined, as there is no definite article
\[C156\]; Jn 2:4, Th 15,
79, 99, =Lk 14:26; see 'The Maternal
Spirit' and
'Theogenesis'; cp. [Odes
of St. Solomon](http://www.goodnewsinc.net/othbooks/odesolmn.html)
35:6--- 'I was carried like a child by its mother';)

**102.  Yeshúa says: Woe unto them, the clergy--- for they are like a
dog sleeping in the manger of oxen. For neither does he eat, nor does
he allow the oxen to eat.** (Th 39; [*The Fables*](https://gopher.elib.com:8070/0/Library/Gutenberg/aesop11.txt)
of Aesop ;)

**103.  Yeshúa says: Blest be the person who knows in** \[**which**\]
**part the bandits may invade, so that he shall arise and collect
his** \[**things**\] **and gird up his loins before they enter.** (=Lk
12:35 & 39;)

**104.  They say** \[**to him:**\] **Come, let us pray today and let
us fast. \|\| Yeshúa says: Which then is the transgression that I have
committed, or in what have I been vanquished? But when the Bridegroom
comes forth from the Bridal-Chamber, then let them fast and let them
pray.** (Mk 2:19-20, Th 14;)

**105.  Yeshúa says: Whoever acknowledges father and mother, shall be
called the son of a harlot.** (Mt 23:8-9, Lk 14:26, Jn 8:41, Th 101,
'Theogenesis';)

**106.  Yeshúa says: When you make the two one**¹**, you shall become
Sons of Mankind**²**--- and when you say to the mountain: Be moved!,
it shall be moved.** (¹Th 22, cp. the [*Tao Te Ching*](http://www.nokama.com/tao/) 1 of Lao Tsu; 'These two are the
same'; ²Dan 7:13-14, Th 86;)

**107.  Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty is like a shepherd who has 100
sheep. One of them went astray, which was the largest. He left the 99,
he sought for the one until he found it. Having wearied himself, he
said to that sheep: I desire thee more than 99.** (Ezek 34:15-16, =Lk
15:3-6;)

**108.  Yeshúa says: Whoever drinks from my mouth shall become like
me. I myself shall become him, and the secrets shall be manifest to
him.** (Lk 6:40, Jn 4:7-15, 7:37;)

**109.  Yeshúa says: The Sovereignty is like a person who has a
treasure** \[**hidden**\] **in his field without knowing it. And**
\[**after**\] **he died, he bequeathed it to his** \[**son. The**\]
**son did not know** (**about it**) **, he accepted that field, he
sold** \[**it**\]**. And he came who purchased it--- he plowed it,**
\[**he found**\] **the treasure. He began to lend money at interest to
whomever he wishes.** (multiple asyndeta; [*The Fables*](https://gopher.elib.com:8070/0/Library/Gutenberg/aesop11.txt)
of Aesop, Mt 13:44;)

**110.  Yeshúa says: Whoever has found the system and been enriched,
let him renounce the system.** (Th 81;)

**111.  Yeshúa says: The sky and the earth shall be rolled up in your
presence. And he who lives from within the Living-One shall see
neither death** \[**nor fear**\]**--- for Yeshúa says: Whoever finds
himself, of him the world is not worthy.** (Isa 34:4, Lk 21:33, Rev/Ap
6:14;)

**112.  Yeshúa says: Woe to the flesh which depends upon the soul, woe
to the soul which depends upon the flesh.** (asyndeton; Th 87;)

**113.  His Disciples say to him: When will the Sovereignty come?
\|\|** (**Yeshúa says:**) **It shall not come by expectation. They
will not say: Behold here! or: Behold there! But the Sovereignty of
the Father is spread upon the earth, and humans do not perceive it.**
(Lk 17:20-21, Th 51; thus Henry David Thoreau, *Walden*: 'Heaven is
under our feet as well as over our heads';)

**114.  Shimon Kefa says to them: Let Mariam depart from among us, for
women are not worthy of the life. \|\| Yeshúa says: Behold, I shall
entice** **her so that I make her male, in order that she herself
shall become a living spirit like you males. For every female who
becomes male shall enter the Sovereignty of the Heavens.** (Gen 3:16,
Th 22; cp. \[remarkably\] English 'tomboy'; thus Clement of
Alexandria, *[Stromata](http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0210.htm)*
VI.12: 'Souls are neither male nor female, when they no longer marry
nor are given in marriage \[Lk 14:34-36\]; and is not woman
transformed into man, when she is become equally unfeminine, and
manly, and perfect?';)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Notes to Thomas**

        Coptic was
the final stage of the classical Egyptian language, evolving after the
invasion of Alexander the Great (332 BC) and subsequently supplanted
by Arabic following the Muslim conquest (640 AD). It has always been
the liturgical language of the Egyptian Church; moreover, the ancient
Coptic versions of the Old and New Testaments are of great importance
in textual Biblical studies. Utilizing many Greek loan words, Coptic
also adopted the Greek alphabet (with s for S, and w for W), adding
these letters: 4 (shai), 3 (fai), 6 (hori), \`(janja), 2 (gima), 5
(ti), and ¯ (syllable or abbreviation indicator); see
P001.
'[C###]{.underline}', '[P###]{.underline}' and '[T###]{.underline}'
are links to pages/paragraphs in Crum\'s *Dictionary*, Plumley\'s
*Grammar* and Till\'s *Philippos*.

        **Adam** (46,85): Hebrew Md) (blood-red, clay)--- the original
human and/or generic mankind.\
        **Aesop** (102,109): crippled Greek slave who flourished in
the 6th-century BC and was executed at Delphi for 'impiety', whose
*[Fables](https://gopher.elib.com:8070/0/Library/Gutenberg/aesop11.txt)*
were well-known thruout the ancient world; the only non-Israelite
other than the [Delphic
Oracle](http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/philebus.html) ('Recognize
thyself': Th 3) whom Christ is known to have quoted, as also in Lk
4:23 (moral from 'The Quack Frog'), Mt 7:15 ('The Wolf in Sheep\'s
Clothing') and various other allusions.\
        **All** (77): see Totality.\
        **Bear** (101): interpolated Coptic text, ta
(P050)
maau (C197a() gar
(T058) nta
(P202)
\[s
(P035)
mise (C184b-185a) mmo
(P262)
i(P039)
\| eb\]ol (C034a):
'my-mother for did-\[she-bear *accusative-*me \| for\]th'; image of
papyrus, from
Biblio.1.\
        **Bed** (61b, NB as also in 61a): the Coptic text here is:
a.k.telo
(P199a,
C408ab:
did-thou\[*masc*\]-lay) e\`m
(C757a: upon) pa.glog
(P050,
C815a: my-bed)--- this
last is *the one and only* Sahidic Coptic word for 'bed'; it does not
mean 'sofa', for which there are several terms listed in the English
index of Crum under 'couch', e.g. ma n.nkotk (place of-reclining,
C225a)--- thus in the
Sahidic version of Ac 5:15, glog is used for KLINARION and ma n.nkotk
for KRABBATOS.\
        **Blest** (7,18,19,49,54,58,68,69a,69b,79,103): Greek
MAKARIOS; this Greek word means divine, rather than merely human,
beatitude (Mt 5:3 et passim).\
        **Bridal-Chamber** (75,104): Coptic ma n.4eleet (place
of-bride; C153a,
C560b) = Greek NUMFWN =
Hebrew rdx (*kheder*); the bedroom where the marriage is consummated
(Jud 15:1, Ps 19:5, 45:13-15!, S-of-S 1:4, Jn 3:29!, Mt 9:15 \[OI UIOI
TOU NUMFWNOS, the Sons of the Bridal-Chamber\], 25:1-13)--- see Ph
65,71,72,73,82,94,101,108,131,143, Sacrament in Ph Notes.\
        **Clergy** (39,102): Aramaic My#wrp (*perushím*, 'Pharisees':
separated); religious leaders; Mt 5:20, 23:1-39, etc.\
        **Entice** (114): Coptic sok (to blow as the wind or to flow
as water, hence to draw or attract;
C325), as in Jn 6:44
(Greek ELKW).\
        **Everything** (6,67): see Totality.\
        **Gnostic** (5): re the *anti-Gnosticism* of these texts, see
Incarnate and Recognition, Th 5,28,55; Ph
25,72,77,78,98,101,114,132,137; Tr 6,8,9,10,21,28,29,37---
'Gnosticism' is by definition metaphysically Platonic, maintaining
that both the sensory universe and all incarnation are *illusory*; our
texts, on the contrary, share the Biblical view that both the
perceptual universe and all incarnations are *divinely created*.\
        **Heaven** (20,44,114): see Sky.\
        **Holy Spirit** (44): Hebrew #dq-h xwr (*ruakh ha-qodesh*,
Spirit the-Holy; feminine gender) = Greek PNEUMA TO AGION (neuter
gender) = Coptic p.pneuma et.ouaab
(P080,
masculine gender; as also Latin SPIRITUS SANCTUS); see Spirit and
'The Maternal Spirit'.\
        **Image/Imagery** (22,50,83,84): Greek EIKON (similitude) =
Hebrew Mlc (*tselem*, shadow; Gen 1:26); sensory perceptions and/or
mental images, the five senses (Th 19!) together with memory and the
imagination; see 'Angel and
Image'.\
        **Incarnate** (28): Coptic 6n sarc ('in flesh'--- utilizing
the Greek term from Jn 1:14, SARX); thus **blatantly anti-Gnostic**;
see Gnosticism*.*\
        **Jacob the Righteous** (12): Hebrew bq(y (*yakov*: heeler,
supplanter; Gen 25:26) = Greek IAKWBOS = English 'James'; Christ\'s
human brother (Mk 6:3, Jn 7:5, Ac 1:14, 12:17, Jas 1:1).\
        **John the Baptist** (46,78): John = Hebrew Nnxwy (*yokhanan*:
Yah is gracious); the last Hebrew prophet and the Messianic precursor
(Lk 1,3,7), see Oracle, Ph 73,81,133, Baptism in Ph
Notes,
Logia in Tr
Notes.\
        **Kind** (65): see Vintage.\
        **Lord/Master** (47,64a,65,73,74): Hebrew Nwd) (*adón*) =
Greek KURIOS = Coptic \`oeis;
C787b, owner of a slave.\
        **Manifest** (84): Coptic ouwn6 ebol (show forth \[in the
transitive and non-reflexive sense\],
C486b)--- i.e. indicate
something which is both beyond itself and unperceived; see 'Angel and
Image'.\
        **Mariam** (21,114): from Hebrew Mwrm (*mrom*: exalted; Ex
15:20); five females named Mariam appear in the Gospels: the Virgin,
Mariam Magdalene, Mariam of Bethany, Mariam of Cleopas, and Mariam the
Lord\'s human sister (Mc 6:3, Ph 36); the oldest and best manuscripts
of e.g. Jn 20 provide the correct transliteration of this (Semitic)
name into Greek letters: MARIAM--- vs.1 \[) A\], vs.11 \[**p**66c )\],
vs.16 \[) B\], vs.18 \[**p**66 ) B\].\
        **Matthew** (13): Hebrew hy-Ntm (*mattan-yah*: gift of Yah);
the Apostle/Evangelist, also named 'Levi of Alphaeus' (seeLevi in Ph
Notes, Mk
2:14), brother of the Apostle Jacob of Alphaeus; Mt 10:3 etc.\
        **Meaning** (79): see Saying.\
        **Natural** (90): see Vintage.\
        **Oracle/Prophet** (31,52,88): Greek PROFHTHS = Hebrew )ybn
(*nabi*); a divine spokesperson, not merely predictive; note that
there are 24 books in the Hebrew canon of the OT, and also 24 Prophets
including John the Baptist (see [IV-Ezra
14:45](http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/r/rsv/rsv-idx?type=DIV1&byte=3652195),
Rev/Ap 4:4).\
        **Origin** (18): Greek ARCH; a term from the pre-Socratic
Greek philosophers, meaning not a temporal beginning but rather the
primal source or basic substance underlying reality (thus in Gen 1:1
\[Septuagint/LXX\], Mk 1:1, Jn 1:1).\
        **Passer-by** (42): Greek PARAGEIN (by-led); transient,
itinerant--- see Hebrew in Ph
Notes*.*\
        **Philosopher** (13): Greek FILOSOFOS (fond of wisdom); this
word (coined by the pre-Socratic
[Pythagoras](http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/%7Ehistory/Mathematicians/Pythagoras.html))
has no precise Hebrew/Aramaic equivalent, and thus Matthew himself may
have used the Greek term; but see the parallel at Job 9:4, bbl Mkx
(*khakam liba*), 'wise in heart'.\
        **Prophet** (52): see Oracle.\
        **Rabbi** (12): Hebrew ybr (my great-one) = Coptic no2 (great,
C250a); a spiritual
authority; Jn 1:38, 3:26, Mt 23:7.\
        **Recognition** (3,5,39,43,51,56,67,69a,78,80,91,105): Coptic
sooun (C369b) = Greek
GNWSIS (gnosis); this important term means direct personal
acquaintance rather than mere intellectual knowledge, as in Jn 17:25
and I-Jn 4:7; see Th 5, Ph 116,122,134, Tr 1,4,6 etc., Incarnate and
Gnosticism.\
        **Rethink** (28): Greek METANOEW (be with-mind, be
wholeminded, after-mind, reconsider) = Hebrew bw# (*shub*: return); Ps
7:12, 22:27, Mt 3:1-2, 4:17, Lk 3:2-14; the initial message of both
John the Baptist and Christ; this important term 'metanoia'
(mindfulness) contrasts with 'paranoia' (beside-mind, mindlessness)---
it does not signify a mere feeling of remorse, which is METAMELOS
(with/after-sentiment).\
        **Sabbath** (27): Hebrew tb# (*shabat:* repose); the (7th) day
of rest; Ex 21:8-11, Lk 6:1-11, Tr 7, 33--- see the pericope Lk 6:4+
in Codex D (05) \[Bezae\]: 'That same day, he saw someone working on
the Sabbath,¹ he said to him: Man, if indeed you understand what you
are doing, you are blest; if indeed you do not understand, you are
accursed and a transgressor of the Torah'; Nestle-Aland,
Biblio.23,
textual notes (¹asyndeton).\
        **Salome** (61b): Hebrew tymwl# (*shlomit*: peaceful); an
early female Disciple (Mk 15:40-41, 16:1); Ph 59 & 79!\
        **Samaritan** (60): those Hebrews not deported to Babylon and
hence lacking the later OT scriptures (I-Ki 16:24, II-Ki 17),
therefore in post-Exilic times considered heretics (as in Lk 10:25-37,
Jn 4:1-42).\
        **Saying/Meaning** (Prolog, 1,19,38,79): Coptic 4a\`e
(C612b) = Greek LOGOS =
Hebrew rm) (*amr*) = Aramaic )rmym (*memra*); English
'[meaning](http://www.m-w.com/home.htm)' derives from Anglo-Saxon
'mænan' = 'to have in mind, mention, conceive + express', the exact
sense of both *logos* and *memra*; Jn 1:1 thus reads 'In (the) Origin
was the Meaning'; one Greek term for 'word' is RHMA.\
        **Shimon Kefa** (13,114): Hebrew Nw(m# (Shimón) = hearing (Gen
29:33); Aramaic )pyk (*kefa*) = Greek PETROS (bedrock)--- the chief
Apostle, Simon Peter (Mt 10:2, 16:15-19).\
        **Sky/Heaven** (3,6,9,11,12,20,44,54,91,111,114): Coptic pe
(C259a) = Greek OURANOS =
Hebrew Mym# (*shamayim*; plural); note that 'sky' = 'heaven' in all
three languages.\
        **Spirit** (14,29,44,53,60,101,114): Hebrew xwr (*ruakh*:
feminine gender!) = Greek PNEUMA (neuter gender!); in both languages
the word for 'spirit' is like 'breath' or 'wind' (Isa 57:16, Jn
3:5-8); see Holy Spirit.\
        **System** (21,27,56,80,110): see World .\
        **Theologian** (39): Greek GRAMMATEUS (scribe); an expert on
the scriptures; Mt 23:1-39 etc.\
        **Thomas** (Prolog, 13, Colophon): Aramaic Mw)t (*taom*) =
Greek DIDUMOS; 'duplicate, twin'; the Apostle Thomas, author of this
text (Jn 11:16, 20:24-29, 21:2); also note that Hebrew 'Judas' =
'praised' = Arabic 'hammad' as in 'Nag Hammadi' (village of-praise)
and 'Mohammad'
(great-praise), the Ishmaelite prophet: Gen 16-17, 21:1-21, 25:12-18,
Zech 9:6-7!, plus not only the Arabic
[Qur'án](http://etext.virginia.edu/koran.html) but also---
importantly--- the
[Hadith](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/uith/index.htm).\
        **Totality/Everyone/Everything/the All** (2,6,67,77): Coptic
thr.3 (all/every of-him,
C424a).\
        **Transgression** (14,104): Coptic nobe
(C222a) = Greek AMARTIA =
Hebrew t)+x (*khatat*); a violation of the Torah, a sin; see Torah and
compare Defilement in Ph Notes.\
        **Trees** (19): the 'five trees' may refer to the five senses
(NB that all emotions can presumably be included in the realm of
feeling); see Tr 28 and 'Angel and Image'; it is noteworthy
that the olive tree in particular does not shed its leaves annually.\
        **Vintage/Kind/Natural** (47,65,90): Greek CRHSTOS (used), Ph
126; the ancient pagans often confused this common term with the rare
CRISTOS, with reference to the Hebrew Messiah.\
        **War** (16): Greek POLEMOS; perhaps it is logical nowadays to
interpret 'the stars falling from the sky' (Mk 13:25, Rev/Ap 6:13 &
8:6 ff.) as a nuclear war, since hydrogen bombs are literally small
man-made stars; 'this generation' in Mk 13:30 is presumably counted
from either May 1948 (the refounding of Israel) or June 1967 (the
reconquest of Jerusalem, Lk 21:24), and could range from forty years
(Num 14:33, Dt 2:14) to one hundred years (Gen 15:13-16).\
        **Wickedness** (45): Greek PONEROS; this term (which also
occurs in the canonical Gospels at Mk 7:22-23 etc.) has a root meaning
of hard work or laborious drudgery, thus oppressive or exploitative.\
        **World/System** (10,16,21,24,27,28,51,56,80,110,111): Greek
KOSMOS (arrangement, order)--- originally the pre-Socratic philosopher
[Pythagoras](http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/%7Ehistory/Mathematicians/Pythagoras.html)
had used this term to designate the entire natural universe, as in
'cosmos'; but in the Gospel *koinê* (later common Greek) it had also
come to signify the conventionality or artificiality of the human
social system, as in 'cosmetic'; see Lk 2:1, 4:5-6, 12:30-31.\
        **Yeshúa** (Prolog *et passim*): Aramaic (w#y = Hebrew (w#why
(*Yehóshua*); from (#y-hwhy (*YHWH ysha:* He-Is Savior); Josh 1:1,
Ezra 5:2 (Aramaic form), Mt 1:21, Ph 20a; this name could not be
accurately transcribed in Greek, which lacks the SH sound; in the
Greek and Coptic uncial manuscripts it was invariably abbreviated IS
or IHS with an overline; see also the second commandment as written
*exclusively* on synagogue tablets of the Decalogue
): hyhy (the
grammatically correct form of He Is')!\
        **Yoga** (90): Coptic na6b ('yoke',
C726), here meaning a
spiritual discipline (the cognate Sanskrit term 'yoga' conveys this
sense quite well); see Ph 79.
