# There Is Only One Spaceship Earth

![](astore-img.jpeg){class="a"}

### Freeing the World from the Deadly Shadow of Genocide and Ecocide

## By [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

When I was in the U.S. military, I learned a saying (often [wrongly
attributed](https://www.dialogues-de-platon.org/faq/faq008.htm) to the
Greek philosopher Plato) that only the dead have seen the end of war.
Its persistence through history to this very moment should indeed be
sobering. What would it take for us humans to stop killing each other
with such vigor and in such numbers?

Song lyrics tell me [to be
proud](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-KoXt9pZLGM) to be an American,
yet war and profligate preparations for more of the same are omnipresent
here. My government spends more on its military than the [next 10
countries](https://www.pgpf.org/blog/2023/04/the-united-states-spends-more-on-defense-than-the-next-10-countries-combined)
combined (and most of them are allies). In this century, our leaders
have twice warned of an "[axis of
evil](https://www.politico.com/story/2019/01/29/bush-axis-of-evil-2002-1127725)"
intent on harming us, whether the fantasy troika of Iraq, Iran, and
North Korea cited by President George W. Bush early in 2002 or [a new
one](https://www.voanews.com/a/china-not-russia-still-tops-list-of-threats-to-us/7534999.html)
--- China, Russia, and North Korea --- in the Indo-Pacific today.
Predictably given that sort of threat inflation, this country is now
[closing in on](https://tomdispatch.com/spending-unlimited-2/) a
trillion dollars a year in "[defense
spending](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/the-pentagon-ate-our-government),"
or close to two-thirds of federal discretionary spending, in the name of
having a military machine capable of defeating "evil" troikas (as well
as combatting global terrorism). A significant part of that huge sum is
reserved for producing a [new
generation](https://www.businessinsider.com/nuclear-modernization-plans-are-unnecessarily-costly-and-risky-2021-7)
of nuclear weapons that will be quite capable of destroying this planet
with missiles and warheads to spare.

[]{#anchor}My country, to be blunt, has long been
[addicted](https://tomdispatch.com/william-astore-confessions-of-a-recovering-weapons-addict/)
to war, killing, violence, and massive preparations for more of the
same. We need an intervention. We need to confront our addiction. Yet
when it comes to war and preparations for future conflicts, our leaders
aren't even close to hitting rock bottom. They remain in remarkable
denial and see no reason to change their ways.

To cite two recent examples: Just before Easter weekend this year,
President Biden swore he was personally
[devastated](https://www.reuters.com/world/biden-acknowledges-pain-arab-americans-over-war-gaza-2024-03-29)
by Palestinian suffering in Gaza. At the same time, his administration
insisted that a United Nations Security Council resolution for a
ceasefire in Gaza that it allowed to pass was
"[non-binding](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X4ohUMB9Wjg)" and,
perhaps to make that very point, reportedly
[shipped](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2024/03/29/us-weapons-israel-gaza-war/)
1,800 MK84 2,000-pound bombs and 500 MK82 500-pound bombs off to Israel,
assumedly to be used in --- yes! --- Gaza.

The Biden administration refuses to see the slightest contradiction in
such a stance. Men like Joe Biden and his chief diplomat Antony Blinken
confess to being disturbed, [even
shocked](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vxnpY0owPkA), by the
devastation our bombs deliver. Who knew Israel would use them to kill or
wound [more than
100,000](https://www.middleeastmonitor.com/20240403-gaza-death-toll-nears-33000/)
Palestinians? Who knew that they'd reduce [significant parts of
Gaza](https://chrishedges.substack.com/p/a-genocide-foretold) to rubble?
Who knew that a blank check of support for Israel would enable that
country to --- it's hard not to use the phrase --- offer a final
solution to the Gaza question?

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642598348/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Not to be outdone by the Democrats, Republican Congressman Tim Walberg
of Michigan recently cited the examples of [Hiroshima and
Nagasaki](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/gop-rep-tim-walberg-suggests-gaza-handled-nagasaki-hiroshima-rcna145752)
in seeking a "quick" end to the conflict in Gaza (before walking his
comments back somewhat). For him, Israel remains America's greatest
ally, whatever [its
actions](https://www.caitlinjohnst.one/p/israels-savage-destruction-of-gazas),
even as he argues that Palestinians in Gaza merit no humanitarian aid
from the United States whatsoever.

With that horrifying spectacle --- and given the TV news and social
media, it truly has been a spectacle! --- of genocide in Gaza, America's
leaders have embraced the very worst of
[Machiavelli](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niccolò_Machiavelli),
preferring to be feared rather than loved, while putting power first and
principle last. Former National Security Adviser and Secretary of State
Henry Kissinger, recently deceased, rightly vilified for pursuing a
[Bismarckian
Realpolitik](https://direct.mit.edu/isec/article/43/1/7/12204/The-Rarity-of-Realpolitik-What-Bismarck-s),
and deeply involved in the devastation of Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos,
might even have blanched at the full-throttled support for war (and
weapons sales) now being pursued by this country's leaders. Dividing the
world into armed camps based on fear seems basic to our foreign policy,
a reality now echoed in domestic politics as well, as the Democratic
blue team and the MAGA Republican red team attack each other as
"fascistic" or worse. In this all-American world of ours, all is
conflict, all is war.

When asked about such an addiction to war, your average government
official will likely claim it's not our fault. "Freedom isn't free," so
the bumper sticker says, meaning in practice that this country stands
prepared to kill others without mercy to ensure its "way of life," which
also in practice means unbridled consumption by an ever-shrinking
portion of Americans and unapologetic profiteering by the richest and
greediest of us. Call it the "moderate" bipartisan consensus within the
Washington Beltway. Only an "extremist" would dare call for restraint,
tolerance, diplomacy, and peace.

**A Common Cause to Unify Humanity**

Short of an attack on Earth by aliens, it's hard to imagine the U.S.
today making common cause with "enemies" like China, Iran, North Korea,
or Russia. What gives? Isn't there a better way and, if so, how would we
get there?

In fact, there is a common foe --- or perhaps a common cause --- that
should unite us all as humans. That cause is Earth, the health of our
planet and all the life forms on it. And that foe, to state the obvious
(even if it regularly goes unsaid), is war, which is unhealthy in the
extreme not just for us but for our planet, too.

War turns people into killers --- of our fellow humans, of course, but
also of all forms of life within our (often very large) blast radii. In
addition, war is a mass distraction from what should truly matter to us:
the sacredness of life and the continued viability of our planet and its
ecology. Call it a cliché but there's no way to deny it: there is indeed
only one Spaceship Earth. As far as we know now, our planet is the sole
body in the universe teeming with life. Of course, the universe is
incomprehensibly vast and there could well be other forms of life out
there, but we don't know that, not with certainty anyway.

Imagine, in a dystopic future, America's "best and brightest" (or the
"best and brightest" of another country) acting in a nuclear fury,
employing the very weaponry that [continues to
proliferate](https://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/worldwide) but
hasn't been used since the destruction of two Japanese cities on August
6 and 9, 1945, and so crippling Spaceship Earth. Imagine also that our
planet is truly the universe's one magnificent and magical spot of life.
Wouldn't it be hard then to imagine a worse crime, not just against
humanity, but life itself cosmically? There would be no recompense, no
forgiveness, no redemption --- and possibly no recovery either.

Of course, I don't know if God (or gods) exists. Though I was raised a
Catholic, I find myself essentially an agnostic today. Yet I do believe
in the sacredness of life in all its diversity. And as tenacious as life
may be, given our constant pursuit of war, I fear the worst.

If you're of a certain age, you may recall when the astronauts on Apollo
8 [witnessed earthrise](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VraZdvxe1Jc) as
their spaceship orbited the moon in 1968. The crew
[read](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=njpWalYduU4) from Genesis, though
in truth it could have been from any creation story we humans have ever
imagined to account for how we and our world came to be. Specific
religions or creeds didn't truly matter at that moment, nor should they
now. What mattered was the sense of awe we felt as we first viewed the
Earth from space in its full glory but also all its fragility.

For make no mistake, this planet is fragile. Its ecosystems can be
destroyed. Not for nothing did the inventor of the atomic bomb, J.
Robert Oppenheimer, turn to the [Hindu scriptures to
intone](https://www.businessinsider.com/oppenheimer-famous-quote-become-death-destroyer-worlds-from-hindu-scripture-2023-7),
"Now I am become death, the destroyer of worlds," when he saw the first
atomic device explode and expand into a mushroom cloud during the
Trinity test in New Mexico in July 1945.

In the febrile postwar climate of anti-communism that would all too soon
follow, America's leaders would decide that atomic bombs weren't faintly
destructive enough. What they needed were thermonuclear bombs, 1,000
times more destructive, to fight World War III against the "[big fat
commie rat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z0YpTfXZdyo)." Now nine (9!)
nations have nuclear weapons, with more undoubtedly hankering to join
the club. So how long before mushroom clouds soar toward the
stratosphere again? How long before we experience some version of
planetary ecocide via a nuclear exchange and the [nuclear
winter](https://climate.envsci.rutgers.edu/pdf/WiresClimateChangeNW.pdf)
that could follow it?

**Genocide and Ecocide on a Planetary Scale**

The genocide happening in Gaza today may foreshadow one possible future
for this planet. The world's lone superpower, its self-styled beacon of
freedom, now dismisses U.N. Security Council resolutions to stop the
killing as "non-binding." Meanwhile, Israel, whose founding was a
response to a Holocaust inflicted during World War II and whose people
collectively said Never Again, is now killing, starving, and displacing
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians in the name of righteous vengeance
for Hamas's October 7th attack.

If the U.S. and Israel can spin mass murder in Palestine as not just
defensible, but even positive ("defeating Hamas terrorists"), what hope
do we have as a species? Is this the future we have to look forward to,
an endless echoing of our murderous past?

I refuse to believe it. It truly should be possible to imagine and work
toward something better. Yet, in all honesty, it's hard to imagine new
paths being blazed by such fossilized thinkers as Joe Biden and Donald
Trump.

"Don't trust anyone over thirty" was a [telling
catchphrase](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_Weinberg) of the 1960s.
Now, we're being told as Americans that we'll have to place our trust in
one of two men almost at or exceeding 80 years of age. Entrusting and
empowering [political
dinosaurs](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/depression-thy-name-is-bidentrump),
however, represents an almost surefire path toward future
extinction-level events.

Let me turn instead to a 25-year-old who did imagine a better future,
even as he protested in the most extreme way imaginable the genocide in
Gaza. This February, fellow airman Aaron Bushnell lit [himself on
fire](https://bracingviews.substack.com/p/airman-sets-himself-on-fire-to-protest)
outside the Israeli embassy in Washington, D.C. He sacrificed his life
in a most public way to challenge us to do something, anything, to stop
genocide. America's "leaders" answered him by ignoring his sacrifice and
sending more bombs, thousands of them, to Israel.

Aaron Bushnell did, however, imagine a better world. As he explained
last year in a [private
post](https://www.caitlinjohnst.one/p/violent-extremists-get-called-moderates):

> "I've realized that a lot of the difference between me and my less
> radical friends is that they are less capable of imagining a better
> world than I am. I follow YouTubers like Andrewism that fill my head
> with concrete images of free, post-scarcity communities and it makes
> me so much more prepared to reject things about the current world,
> because I've imagined how things could be and that helps me see how
> extremely bullshit things are right now.

> "What I'm trying to say is, it's so important to imagine a better
> world. Let your thoughts run wild with idealistic dreams of what the
> world *should* look like and let the pain and anger at how it's not
> that way flow through you. Let it free your mind and fuel your rage
> against the machine.

> "It's not too late for you or anyone. We can have the world of our
> dreams tomorrow, but we have to be willing to fight today."

His all-too-public suicide was a fiery cry of despair, but also a plea
for a better future, one free of mass murder.

Earlier this week, millions of people across America witnessed a total
eclipse of the sun. It's awe-inspiring, even a bit alarming, to see the
sun disappear in the middle of the day. Those watching took comfort in
knowing that it would reappear from behind the moon in a matter of
seconds or minutes and so gloried in that fleeting moment of
preternatural darkness.

But imagine if the moon and sun were somehow to become permanently stuck
in place. Imagine that darkness was our future --- our only future.
Sadly enough, however, it's not the moon but we humans who can
potentially cast the Earth into lasting darkness. Via the nuclear winter
that could result from a nuclear conflict on this planet, we could
indeed cast a shadow between the sun and life itself, a power of
destruction that, tragically, may far exceed our current level of
wisdom.

We know from history that it's far easier to destroy than to create, far
easier to kill than to preserve. Yet when countries make genocide or
ecocide (from nuclear winter) possible and defensible (as a sign of
uncompromising "toughness" and perhaps the defense of "freedom"), you
know that their leaders are, in some sense, [morally obtuse
monsters](https://peaceandplanetnews.org/biden-is-quietly-funding-nuclear-weapons-upgrades-that-could-imperil-the-planet/).
And who or what are we if we choose to follow such monsters?

As human populations rise, as vital resources like water, food, and fuel
shrink, as this planet grows ever hotter thanks to our intervention and
our excesses, we'll need to cooperate more than ever to ensure our
mutual survival. Far too often, however, America's strategic thinkers
dismiss cooperation through diplomacy or otherwise as naïve, unreliable,
and impractical. "Competition" through zero-sum games, war, or other
hyperviolent urges seems so much more "reasonable," so much more
"human."

To the victor goes the spoils, so it's said. But a planet despoiled by
thermonuclear war, cast into darkness, ravaged by radiation, disease,
and death, would, of course, offer no victory to anyone. Unless we put
our efforts into ending war, rather than continuing to war on one
another, such conflicts will, sooner or later, undoubtedly put an end to
us.

In reality, our worst enemy isn't some "axis" or other combination of
imagined foes from without, it's within. We remain the world's most
dangerous species, the one capable of wiping out most or all of the
rest, not to speak of ourselves, with our folly. So, as Aaron Bushnell
wrote, free your mind. Collectively, there must be a better way for all
creatures, great and small, on this fragile spaceship of ours.

Copyright 2024 William J. Astore

*Follow TomDispatch on *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)* and
join us on *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopian novel, *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)* (the
final one in his Splinterlands series), Beverly Gologorsky's
novel *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*, and
Tom Engelhardt's *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy's *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower's *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [William J. Astore](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/williamastore/)

**William J. Astore**, a retired lieutenant colonel (USAF) and
professor of history, is
a [*TomDispatch* regular ](https://tomdispatch.com/are-the-best-years-of-my-country-behind-me/)and
a senior fellow at the Eisenhower Media Network (EMN), an organization
of critical veteran military and national security professionals. His
personal substack is [*Bracing Views*](https://bracingviews.com/). His
video testimony for the Merchants of Death Tribunal is available [at
this
link](https://rumble.com/v4cruwx-the-military-industrial-complex-lt.-col.-william-astore.html).

Thanks to TomDispatch.com, where this article originally appeared
without the title image.
