# The Distortion of Campus Protests over Gaza

![](benedict-protests-gaza.png){class="alarge"}

### How the Right Has Weaponized Antisemitism to Distract from Israel\'s War

## By [Helen Benedict](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/helen-benedict/)

Helicopters have been throbbing overhead for days now. Nights, too.
Police are swarming the streets of Broadway, many in riot gear. Police
vans, some as big as a city bus, are lined up along side streets and
Broadway.Â 

Outside the gates of the Columbia University campus, a penned-in group
of pro-Israel demonstrators has faced off against a penned-in group of
anti-genocide and pro-Palestinian protesters. These groups are usually
small, often vastly outnumbered by the police around them, but they
*are* loud and they are not Columbia students. They've been coming every
day this April to shout, chant, and hold up signs, some of which are
filled with hateful speech directed at the other side, equating protests
against the slaughter in Gaza with being pro-Hamas, and calls to bring
home the hostages with being pro-genocide.

Inside the locked gates of the campus, the atmosphere is entirely
different. Even as the now-notorious student tent encampment there
stretches through its second week, all is calm. Inside the camp,
students sleep, eat, and sit on bedspreads studying together and making
signs saying, "Nerds for Palestine," "Passover is for Liberation," and
"Stop the Genocide." The Jewish students there held a seder on Passover.
The protesters even asked faculty to come into the encampment and teach
because they miss their classes. Indeed, it's so quiet on campus that
you can hear birds singing in the background. The camp, if anything, is
hushed.

**The Real Story on Campus**

Those protesters who have been so demonized, for whom the riot police
are waiting outside --- the same kinds of students Columbia University's
president, Minouche Shafik, invited the police to
[arrest](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/18/nyregion/columbia-university-protests-antisemitism.html),
zip-tie, and cart away on April 18th --- are mostly undergraduate women,
along with a smaller number of undergraduate men, 18 to 20 years old,
standing up for what they have a right to stand up for: their beliefs.
Furthermore, for those who don't know the Columbia campus, the
encampment is blocking nobody's way and presents a danger to no one. It
is on a patch of lawn inside a little fence buffered by hedges. As I
write, those students are not preventing anyone from walking anywhere,
nor occupying any buildings, perpetrating any violence, or even making
much noise. (In the early hours of April 30th, however, student
protesters did occupy Hamilton Hall in reaction to a sweep of
suspensions the day before.)

As a tenured professor at Columbia's Journalism School, I've been
watching the student protests ever since the brutal Hamas attack of
October 7th, and I've been struck by the decorum of the protesting
students, as angry and upset as they are on both sides. This has
particularly impressed me knowing that several students are directly
affected by the ongoing war. I have a Jewish student who has lost family
and friends to the attack by Hamas, and a Palestinian student who
learned of the deaths of her family and friends in Gaza while she was
sitting in my class.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1636281125/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

Given how horrific this war is, it's not surprising that there have been
a few protesters who lose control and shout hideous things, but for the
most part, such people have been quietly walked away by other students
or campus security guards. All along, the main messages from the
students have been "Bring back our hostages" on the Israeli side and
"Stop slaughtering Gazan civilians" on the antiwar and
pro-Palestinian-rights side. Curiously enough, those messages are not so
far apart, for almost everyone wants the hostages safe and almost
everyone is calling for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to
take a different direction and protect the innocent.

Unfortunately, instead of allowing students to have their say and
disciplining those who overstep boundaries, Columbia President Shafik
and her administration
[suspended](https://www.columbiaspectator.com/news/2023/11/10/columbia-suspends-sjp-and-jvp-following-unauthorized-thursday-walkout/)
two of the most vocal groups protesting Israel's war on Gaza: the
student chapter of Jewish Voice for Peace and Students for Justice in
Palestine. This only
[enraged](https://www.columbiaspectator.com/news/2023/11/15/to-shut-us-down-you-have-only-made-us-stronger-hundreds-of-students-faculty-protest-suspension-of-sjp-jvp/)
and galvanized students and some faculty more.

**The Right Seizes and Distorts the Narrative**

Then the right got involved, using accusations of [widespread
antisemitism](https://edworkforce.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=410117)
to take eyes off the astronomical [death
toll](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/longform/2023/10/9/israel-hamas-war-in-maps-and-charts-live-tracker)
in Gaza --- more than 34,000 reportedly dead as I write this, more than
14,500 of them children --- while fretting about the safety of Jewish
students instead.

The faculty of Columbia takes antisemitism seriously and we have methods
in place to deal with it. We also recognize that some of the chants of
the protesters do make certain Jewish students and faculty
uncomfortable. But as a group of Jewish faculty pointed out in an
[op-ed](https://www.columbiaspectator.com/opinion/2024/04/10/jewish-faculty-reject-the-weaponization-of-antisemitism/)
for the student newspaper, the *Columbia Daily Spectator*, it's absurd
to claim that antisemitism, which is defined by the [Jerusalem
Declaration](https://jerusalemdeclaration.org/) as "discrimination,
prejudice, hostility or violence against Jews as Jews," is rampant on
our campus. "To argue that taking a stand against Israel's war on Gaza
is antisemitic is to pervert the meaning of the term," we wrote.
"Labeling pro-Palestinian expression as anti-Jewish hate speech requires
a dangerous and false conflation of Zionism with Jewishness."

Sadly, that's exactly what the right has succeeded in doing. Not only is
the slaughter in Gaza getting lost in the growing fog of hysterical
speech about antisemitism on American college campuses, but so is the
fact that Arab and Muslim students are being targeted, too. Some
students even reported they were
[sprayed](https://www.columbiaspectator.com/news/2024/01/22/protesters-allegedly-sprayed-with-hazardous-chemical-at-pro-palestinian-rally-nearly-two-dozen-report/)
with a mace-like material, possibly manufactured by the Israeli
military, and that, as a result, several protesters had to go to the
hospital. My own students told me they have been targeted with hate mail
and threats over social media. I even saw a doxxing truck sponsored by
the far-right group Accuracy in Media driving around the Columbia
neighborhood bearing photographs of Muslim students, naming them and
calling them terrorists. Again, it's important to note that most of the
harassers have been outsiders, not students.

No, the real threat to American Jews comes not from students but from
the very white nationalist MAGA Republicans who are shouting about
antisemitism the loudest.

Then came the Republican hearings.

**The Congressional Hearings**

Having watched the presidents of Harvard, MIT, and the University of
Pennsylvania stumble and fall in the face of MAGA Representative Elise
Stefanik's
[bullying](https://www.npr.org/2023/12/05/1217459477/harvard-penn-mit-antisemitism-congress-hearing)
accusations of antisemitism in December, Columbia President Shafik did
all she could to avoid a similar fate when it was her turn. But when she
submitted to four hours of McCarthyite-style questioning in Congress on
April 17th --- one Republican even asked if there were Republicans among
the faculty --- Shafik cringed, evaded, and caved.

"I agree with you" was her most frequent phrase. She never pushed back
against the characterization of the Columbia campus by Republican
Representatives Virginia Foxx and Stefanik as riddled with antisemitism.
She never stood up for the integrity of our faculty and students or for
the fact that we're a campus full of remarkable scholars and artists
perfectly capable of governing ourselves. She never even pointed out
that who we suspend, fire, or hire is none of Congress's business.
Instead, she broke all our university rules by agreeing to investigate
and fire members of our own faculty and to call in the police when she
deemed it necessary.

The very day after the hearings, that's exactly what she did.

Meanwhile, the death toll in Gaza was never even mentioned.

**A Pandora's Box**

Shafik's craven performance in front of Republican lawmakers opened a
Pandora's box of troubles. The student protesters swelled in numbers and
erected their encampment. Faculty members wrote outraged [opinion
pieces](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/apr/18/columbia-university-congress-antisemitism-republicans-gaza?fbclid=IwZXh0bgNhZW0CMTEAAR1m5q_c2ad493jABRlTErJVyFDtBQz24wDHhh5N8YieE74Su38qdD5C3lg_aem_AcVSg77cmZp4HM9jWI1YvYGycJ_O6sFnerBUmt17Ic3sjAFiP8wRdkqhh18Bp_HiuxLdU-XniPn5VyWNBMzzskaq)
condemning Shafik's behavior. And when she called in the police to
[arrest](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/18/nyregion/columbia-university-protests-antisemitism.html)
students, more students than ever joined the protests all over the
country.

Then, on April 24th, Speaker of the House [Mike Johnson
visited](https://newrepublic.com/article/180973/mike-johnsons-cynical-grandstanding-visit-columbia-university)
Columbia with Republicans Mike Lawler, Nicole Malliotakis, and Anthony
D'Esposito (and even Foxx from North Carolina), acting as if some kind
of terrible riot had gone on here. Standing at the top of the steps in
front of the grand facade of Low Library, a century-old building meant
to symbolize learning and reason, and surrounded by heckling students,
Johnson [declared](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiX59qkPcFw) that
some Jewish students had told him of "heinous acts of bigotry,"
characterized the protesters as "endorsed by Hamas," and called for
Shafik to resign "if she cannot immediately bring order to the chaos."

"What chaos?" said an undergraduate standing next to me on the steps as
we listened.

"He's saying a bunch of 20-year-old American college students are in
cahoots with Hamas?" another asked incredulously.

Johnson then escalated the threats, claiming the National Guard might be
called in and that Congress might even revoke federal funding if
universities couldn't keep such [protests under
control](https://www.nytimes.com/live/2024/04/24/us/columbia-protests-mike-johnson#johnson-columbia-university-president-protests).

I looked behind me at the encampment on the other side of campus. In
front of the tents on the grass, the students had erected a sign listing
what they called "Gaza Encampment Community Guidelines." These included:
"No desecration of the land. No drug/alcohol consumption. Respect
personal boundaries." And most significantly, "We commit to assuming the
best intentions, granting ourselves and others grace when mistakes are
made, and approaching conflict with the goal of addressing and
repairing." Designated faculty and students stood at the entrance to
make sure no outsiders got in, and that nobody entered the encampment
unless they had read and agreed to that list of commitments. The
noisiest people on campus were the thronging media. But *nobody* and
*nothing* was out of control.

**The Weaponization of Antisemitism**

Sadly, despite the reality on the ground at Columbia, the right's wild
narrative of virulent antisemitism here has been swallowed whole, not
just by Republicans but by a long list of Democrats, too, including
President Biden and Senators Kirsten Gillibrand and Chuck Schumer, not
to speak of New York Representatives Hakeem Jeffries, Jerry Nadler, Dan
Goldman, and Adriano Espaillat. They have all [publicly
condemned](https://www.cityandstateny.com/politics/2024/04/heres-what-new-york-elected-officials-are-saying-about-columbia-university-protests/396072/)
the supposedly rampant antisemitism on campus without, it seems,
bothering to check their facts.

Meanwhile, MAGA Christian Nationalist [Sean
Feucht](https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-features/maga-preacher-sean-feucht-scored-millions-from-his-trump-loving-flock-1380126/)
[posted](https://twitter.com/seanfeucht/status/1782531073462944254?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1782531073462944254%7Ctwgr%5E07d02d03aeda651c70f02b4840e5c999d824c66e%7Ctwcon%5Es1_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Fstream.org%2Fworship-leader-sean-feucht-heads-to-columbia-university-thursday-for-united-for-israel-march%2F)
on X that "Columbia has been taken over by radical Pro-Hamas
protesters."

Back in the real world, the right's hysteria over such supposed
antisemitism hasn't really been about protecting Jews at all, as many
faculty members (including us Jewish ones) have
[written](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/apr/18/columbia-university-congress-antisemitism-republicans-gaza?fbclid=IwZXh0bgNhZW0CMTEAAR25EMSAyK_Fw_J1n838jI0UOI5Yem90je5EJuTwAHrclOci02UYpMzZIrk_aem_AWIXohf9BgAv2MQcL31Y-QQMD3LF8aGADnqF_McsQQRSHPMTln3FFBX1w-2csubuv8m71Dsl16rl3FesoKYDmDtM)
and
[spoken](https://www.insidehighered.com/news/faculty-issues/academic-freedom/2024/04/19/columbia-president-accused-throwing-profs-under-bus)
about. Rather, the right is weaponizing antisemitism as a way of
furthering its campaign to suppress the kind of freedom of thought and
speech on campus that threatens its authoritarian goals of turning this
country Christian, conservative, straight, and white --- not to mention
their urge to suppress support of Palestinian autonomy.

**When Students Don't Feel Safe**

My students tell me they feel perfectly safe on campus. They may not
like some of the chants they sometimes hear. I myself have caught a few
that chilled me as a Jew. I've also heard chants that sicken me on
behalf of my Muslim friends. But those have been rare. And campus is a
place where everyone should be free to debate, disagree, express their
opinions, listen, and learn. We have to remember that free speech does
not mean speech we agree with.

No, where my students do not feel safe is out on Broadway, where
extremists on both sides gather. They don't feel safe when the false
narratives of Republican politicians draw far-right angry mobs to the
campus gates, something that is
[happening](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n7jh-sbP2CY) just as I'm
writing this piece. Most of all, they don't feel safe when police arrive
on campus with guns in their holsters and zip-ties hanging from their
belts.

I stood and watched that day the police came. Four huge drones hovered
overhead, along with those eternally buzzing helicopters. Dozens of
police buses were lined up on West 114th Street on the south side of
campus as if prepared to deal with some massive, violent riot. Then, in
came the police, some in riot gear, to tie the hands of more than [100
students](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/20/nyregion/arrested-columbia-students-suspended.html)
behind their backs and march them onto police buses.

Not a single student resisted. Even the police were quoted as saying
they presented no danger to anyone. As NYPD Chief of Patrol John Chell
[said](https://www.columbiaspectator.com/news/2024/04/18/shafik-authorizes-nypd-to-sweep-gaza-solidarity-encampment-officers-in-riot-gear-arrest-over-100/),
"To put this in perspective, the students that were arrested were
peaceful, offered no resistance whatsoever, and were saying what they
wanted to say in a peaceful manner."

Not long later, those arrested students were suspended and the ones who
attend Barnard were [locked
out](https://www.curbed.com/article/housing-network-evicted-barnard-columbia-student-protesters.html)
of their dorms. Faculty and friends had to offer their couches and spare
beds to save those young women from being homeless on the streets of New
York. One of them is in my building staying with a colleague downstairs.
"Nobody told our parents that we were being evicted," she told me in my
lobby.

**Faculty Response**

Many faculty were so shocked by these events that on Monday, April 22nd,
some 300 of us
[gathered](https://www.columbiaspectator.com/news/2024/04/23/over-100-faculty-members-protest-in-rally-to-support-our-students-and-reclaim-our-university/)
on the steps of Low Library, holding up signs that said, "Hands Off Our
Students" and "End Student Suspensions Now." Several professors gave
impassioned speeches praising those students for their courage,
demanding that academic freedom be protected, and castigating Shafik for
throwing us all under the bus.

Still, Gaza was not mentioned. It seemed as if the genocide occurring
there was disappearing in the fog.

"I'm worried that the message of our protest is getting lost," that
suspended student told me as we spoke in the lobby. "Everyone's talking
about academic freedom and police repression instead."

Indeed, not only is the protest against Israel's pathological spree of
murder in Palestine and on the West Bank being drowned out in this
debate, so are the student protesters' demands, so let me reiterate them
here:

*That Columbia divest of all investments that profit from Israel's
occupation and bombing of Palestine.*

*That Columbia sever academic ties with its programs at Tel Aviv and
other Israeli Universities.*

*That the policing of the campus be stopped immediately.*

*That the university release a statement calling for a ceasefire in
Gaza.*

The other day, on New York's National Public Radio station, WNYC, I
heard a caller who had been a campus protester in 1968 say something
like, "It's funny how the protesters of 50 years ago are always right,
but the protesters of today are always wrong." The people who
demonstrated for civil rights then were demonized, beaten, even
murdered, but they were right, he pointed out, as were the people who
demonstrated against the Vietnam War. (I would say the same for those
who protested against the Iraq War and for the #MeToo and Black Lives
Matter movements.)

One day, the students who are protesting the genocide in Gaza and the
persecution of Palestinians today will be seen as on the right side,
too. History will prove it. Until then, let's turn the discussion back
to where it belongs: an end to the war on Gaza.

**Final Note:** This piece was written before the president and trustees
of Columbia called in the riot police on the night of April 30th,
against the advice of many faculty, to arrest the students in the
encampment, as well as those who had occupied Hamilton Hall. Videos show
considerable police violence against the students. What happens next
remains to be seen.

Copyright 2024 Helen Benedict

Featured image: [Students protest to support Gaza outside the Israeli
consulate in New York
City](https://flickr.com/photos/joegaza/17318314361/in/photolist-5NpgUf-87LrBk-86sm98-914hRW-somTuV-s6WGYg-4o8WHB-rro3iC-4o8mgx-5X3sdA-4o8sMz-5TGaFi-somTon-4o8n9i-5X3sKL-s54VwD-4od28N-s6W7J4-5X3rBj-sop7nP-4ocTr7-s54KFg-4o8tHH-sm71GN-rrA76n-rrzZtp-sodWEQ-s6Nvy7-4o7D3r-rroPWm-4o8SwX-s6NbwE-5TLhqm-4o8NbZ-s6Nkxq-s54Rii-s5493c-sombXT-5TGaEZ-5TLhqq-rroyj9-5TGaFa-s6PC5J-4ocSZs-5X3tAJ-soma9n-rroNFf-s6MWvo-sm6Ays-4ocqhC)
by [Joe Catron](https://flickr.com/photos/joegaza/) is licensed under
[CC BY-NC 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/) / Flickr

*FollowÂ TomDispatchÂ onÂ *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)*Â and
join us onÂ *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*. Check
out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopianÂ novel,Â *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*Â (the
final one in his Splinterlands series),Â Beverly Gologorsky's
novelÂ *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,Â and
Tom Engelhardt'sÂ *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy'sÂ *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower'sÂ *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Helen Benedict](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/helen-benedict/)

**Helen Benedict**, who is a professor of journalism at Columbia
University and the author most recently of the novel [*The Good
Deed*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1636281125/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
has been writing about war and refugees for more than a decade. A
recipient of the 2021 PEN Jean Stein Grant for Literary Oral History and
the Ida B. Wells Award for Bravery in Journalism, she has also written
13 other books of fiction and nonfiction.

Thanks to TomDispatch.com where this article first appeared.
