# Dead on Arrival

![](cantarow-img.png){class="alarge"}

### Israel's Blowback Genocide

## By [Ellen Cantarow](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/ellencantarow/)

Words can't express the horrors of Israel's genocide in Gaza. To
actually *feel* the nightmare, you would have to be there under the
bombs, fleeing with Palestinians desperately seeking a safe place that
doesn't exist; seeing building after building destroyed; treading
through
[blood](https://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/latest/we-dread-nightfall-stories-gaza)
in one of the few, only partially standing hospitals; and witnessing
children and other patients sprawled on hospital floors, [limbs
amputated](https://www.newyorker.com/news/dispatch/the-children-who-lost-limbs-in-gaza)
without anesthesia (Israel having
[blocked](https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/israel-blocks-entry-food-and-aid-supplies-kills-starving-civilians-attempt-forcibly-displace-palestinians-northern-gaza-enar)
all medical supplies).

It has taken the Jewish state's savagery to break decades of silence
about its history of [crimes against
humanity](https://www.hrw.org/report/2021/04/27/threshold-crossed/israeli-authorities-and-crimes-apartheid-and-persecution).
U.S. military historian Robert Pape [has
called](https://apnews.com/article/israel-gaza-bombs-destruction-death-toll-scope-419488c511f83c85baea22458472a796?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=em)
the onslaught against Gaza "one of the most intense civilian punishment
campaigns in history." Former U.N. Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights Andrew Gilmour [has
said](https://www.middleeastmonitor.com/20240221-un-official-deems-kill-rates-in-gaza-highest-in-the-world-since-rwandan-genocide/?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email)
that we are witnessing "probably the highest kill rate of any
military... since the Rwandan genocide of 1994."

**An Unsent Letter**

Palestine is finally an international cause. Outrage surges via global
demonstrations. Israel has become a pariah in the [global
South](https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/opinionista/2024-03-19-israel-is-heading-for-full-pariah-status-after-falling-into-the-hamas-trap/).
In the United States, organizations including A Jewish Voice for Peace,
Code Pink, and the U.S. Campaign for Palestinian Rights have been
marching against the horrors now underway.

Within this charged atmosphere, the 66th reunion of my 1958 Philadelphia
High School for Girls graduating class will take place in June 2024.
Girls' High was that city's leading academic public high school of my
time, together with its brother school, Central High (attended by Noam
Chomsky). It was stellar not only for its academic excellence but for
its integration of Black and White students at a time of deep
segregation elsewhere. My mother, who graduated from Girls' High in
1924, sent me there because of its policy of racial inclusiveness.

I recently began preparing an open letter to my classmates about the
genocide in Gaza and the ongoing settler pogroms of ethnic cleansing on
the West Bank --- houses burned, [olive trees
uprooted](https://tomdispatch.com/the-killing-of-gazas-environment/),
Palestinians made to flee. Ours is the prototypical Zionist generation
and I particularly wanted to address my former classmates, some of whom
still cling stubbornly to their allegiance to Israel. I was told,
however, that there wouldn't be time to read the letter at our reunion
which lasts just a few afternoon hours. What follows, then, is based on
the letter I was preparing to read then, had the time been available.

**Zionism and The Six Day War**

In the early 1950s, my best childhood friend collected money to plant
trees in Israel. At one point, her synagogue, which sponsored that
project, needed "straight pins." Somehow, I heard "shraypins" instead, a
mysterious Hebrew word my imagination concocted and that her friends
would find funny indeed. Zionism, in other words, was simply foreign to
me.

The first time I recall a thrill from it came right after Israel's
triumph in the 1967 [Six Day
War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six-Day_War). I was then actively
involved in the anti-Vietnam War movement on my graduate school campus
and, on a trip to Paris that year, didn't want to identify as American.
I spoke French quite well and not being able to tell from my slight
accent that I was an American, someone asked me where I was from.Â 
Searching for a nationality I wouldn't be ashamed of, I blurted out that
I was an "Israelite."

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1506470467/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

"Oh, your people!" he exclaimed. "Such a small people, but such a brave
people!" For the first time, I felt deeply proud of being Jewish, not
the sort of Jew who had (to my mind) cowered in a ghettoized Europe, but
a strong, triumphant Jew with a powerful army. Soon after, my husband
told me about Israel's history --- its 1948 expulsion of 750,000
Palestinian Arabs and its exploitation of the territories it illegally
occupied after the 1967 war. Not long after that, I read Noam Chomsky's
first book about Israeli settler-colonialism, [*Peace in the Middle
East?*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/039471248X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
and never looked back.

**Settler Violence in the 1970s**

My husband, Louis Kampf, taught in the humanities department of M.I.T.
Chomsky was a colleague and became a good friend. It was under his
influence that, in 1979, I first went to Israel and visited the occupied
West Bank. I had an assignment to write about Israeli women --- I was
then a feminist columnist for Cambridge's *The Real Paper* --- and also
agreed to do pieces for New York's *The Village Voice* and *Liberation
Magazine*. For the *Voice* I wrote about [Gush
Emunim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moshe_Levinger) --- the Bloc of
the Faithful, the ancestor of the Jewish settlers' movement. For
*Liberation*, [I wrote](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2538371) about a
Palestinian village, Halhul, two of whose teenagers were murdered by
Israeli settlers from nearby Kiryat Arba.

I stayed in Kiryat Arba, thanks to a distant cousin of my husband's who
got me there in an undercover fashion. One of my interviewees assured me
that she believed in "a great chain of being," Jews on top, all other
humans below, with Arabs at the very bottom, just before animals,
vegetables, and minerals. Her husband referred to the Talmudic
injunction to "rise and kill first." Another settler assured me that the
Arabs could stay on the West Bank only if they would "bow their heads."

Muhammad Milhem, Halhul's mayor, led me to the highest hill in his
village and, pointing toward Kiryat Arba, said, "This is a cancer in our
midst." I wonder if he realized how tragically prophetic his words would
prove to be.

**Genocide in the 2020s**

Since October 8th, I've been riveted by the genocide in Gaza being
perpetrated by the Israeli military, which had prepared for it in a
retrospectively unsettling fashion by decades of dehumanizing
Palestinians. Hamas clearly committed war crimes on October 7th, but
international rules still govern war. A nation's reprisal for acts
against its population must still be
[proportional](https://www.diakonia.se/ihl/resources/international-humanitarian-law/ihl-principle-proportionality/)
to the original crime, which Israel's war on Gaza isn't --- not faintly!
Instead, it's been distinctly
[genocidal](https://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/documents/atrocity-crimes/Doc.1_Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.pdf).
On March 28th, Reuters
[reported](https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/32552-palestinians-killed-gaza-since-oct-7-health-ministry-says-2024-03-28/#:~:text=DUBAI%2C_March_28_(Reuters),health_ministry_said_on_Thursday)
that, according to Gaza's health ministry, at least 32,552 Palestinians
had been killed and 74,980 injured in Israel's post-October 7th military
offensive in the Gaza Strip, while more than 7,000 Gazans are missing,
many likely buried under the rubble.

Israel has cut off most food and water to the region. A March 18th
[Oxfam press
release](https://www.oxfam.org/en/press-releases/gaza-hunger-figures-worst-record-says-oxfam)
announced that Gaza hunger figures are the "worst on record." The World
Health Organization (WHO)
[reports](https://www.who.int/news/item/18-03-2024-famine-in-gaza-is-imminent--with-immediate-and-long-term-health-consequences)
that famine, a rare and catastrophic circumstance, is imminent. Usually
caused by extreme natural events, the famine in Gaza is wholly
human-made. Famine leaves the body prone to all sorts of horrendous
diseases. [According to the
WHO](https://www.who.int/news/item/21-12-2023-lethal-combination-of-hunger-and-disease-to-lead-to-more-deaths-in-gaza),
"\[I\]llness may ultimately kill more people than Israel's offensive.
Infectious diseases are 'soaring,' particularly among children with
100,000 reported cases of diarrhea, 25 times higher than before Israel's
assaults."

Were I able to show my classmates scenes from the hell that is now the
Gaza Strip, where would I begin? Would it be [the
infant](https://theintercept.com/2024/03/23/intercepted-doctor-gaza-interview/#:~:text=in_Khan_Younis.-,Dr.,the_war_began_last_October)
whose face was partially blown off by an Israeli strike? Would it be the
12 year old with burns over 70% of his body? Would it be the countless
[unarmed
civilians](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/apr/02/gaza-palestinian-children-killed-idf-israel-war),
including children, shot in the head and upper body with murderous
intent? Would it be [a
baby](https://www.npr.org/2023/12/26/1221743518/an-aid-worker-describes-the-unbearable-suffering-of-wounded-children-in-gaza)
with both legs amputated, who will never learn to walk?

Dr. Yasser Khan, an ophthalmologist specializing in eyelid and facial
plastic and reconstructive surgery, spent 10 days in Gaza and, in [an
interview](https://theintercept.com/2024/03/23/intercepted-doctor-gaza-interview/#:~:text=in_Khan_Younis.)
with a reporter from the *Intercept*, described what he had seen in the
European Gaza Hospital, now barely functioning, where 35,000 people were
reportedly sheltering. People were cooking in the hallways of a building
in which no sterile environment was possible because there was nothing
with which to sterilize. The medical workers were still often performing
14 or 15 amputations on children daily. Khan saw patients like an
eight-year-old girl, rescued from the rubble with a fractured leg, all
of whose family --- mother, father, aunts, uncles --- was wiped out. And
there are thousands more like her, suffering from trauma that coming
generations will undoubtedly inherit. They have given rise to a new
acronym: [WCNSF, or Wounded Child No Surviving
Family](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/02/29/gaza-children-wcnsf-orphans/).
Khan removed the eyes of patients whose faces had been damaged by
shrapnel, leaving an appearance he dubbed "shrapnel face."

**Aid Workers Targeted**

I would have wanted to remind my classmates that Israel has frequently
targeted aid workers, killing [seven World Central Kitchen (WCK)
employees](https://slate.com/news-and-politics/2024/04/world-central-kitchen-workers-killed-israel-gaza-idf-jose-andres.html)
in early April. The Israelis claimed that it was an accident and
[fired](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/live-blog/israel-hamas-war-live-updates-rcna146529)
the officers it held responsible. But chef Jose Andres, WCK founder,
insisted the attack was purposeful, that Israel had targeted the aid
convoy "car by car." Â 

"This was not just a bad luck situation where 'oops' we dropped the bomb
in the wrong place," [Andres
said](https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/chef-jose-andres-says-israel-targeted-his-aid-workers-systematically-car-by-car-2024-04-03/).
"This was over 1.5, 1.8 kilometers, with a very defined humanitarian
convoy that had signs in the top, in the roof, a very colorful logo that
we are obviously very proud of. It's very clear who we are and what we
do."

"WCK is not just any relief organization,"
[wrote](https://www.thenation.com/article/world/world-central-kitchen-al-shifa-hospital-israel-gaza/)
Jack Mirkinson in *The* *Nation* magazine. "AndrÃ©s is a global celebrity
with ties to the international political establishment. WCK had
beenÂ [working
closely](https://www.timesofisrael.com/since-october-7-world-central-kitchen-has-served-millions-of-meals-in-israel-and-gaza/)Â with
the Israeli government both in Gaza and in Israel proper. It would be
difficult to think of a more mainstream, well-connected group." It was
as if Israel were showing off, Mirkinson added, "flaunting its ability
to cross every known line of international humanitarian law and get away
with it."

**International Court of Justice Ruling**

The International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled on January 26th that
Israel's slaughter in Gaza is a plausible case of genocide and
additional testimony from Francesca Albanese, the U.N.'s Special
Rapporteur on Palestine, "[Anatomy of a
Genocide](https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/anatomy-genocide-report-special-rapporteur-situation-human-rights-palestinian-territories-occupied-1967-francesca-albanese-ahrc5573-advance-unedited-version),"
only emphasized that point, given how little is left but rubble in so
much of Gaza. The majority of its homes no longer exist, nor do its
schools, universities, libraries, or music conservatories.

Violating the [49th Geneva
Convention](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gciv-1949/article-18#:~:text=and_sick_III.-,Protection_of_hospitals,the_Parties_to_the_conflict.),
Israel has fired on ambulances and
[killed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Killing_of_health_workers_in_the_IsraelâHamas_war#:~:text=More_than_685_health_workers,by_Israeli_forces_against_Palestinians)
more than 685 health workers, while wounding about 900 of them. It [has
destroyed](https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/destruction-shifa-hospital-latest-evidence-israels-systematic-dismantling-gazas-health-system#:~:text=After_a_two-week-long,and_completely_out_of_service)
all but a few of Gaza's 36 formerly flourishing hospitals, claiming that
Hamas fighters are hiding in tunnels under the buildings. Against the
civilian population Israel has used weapons like [white
phosphorous](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/white-phosphorus#:~:text=Once_ignited%2C_white_phosphorus_is,of_phosphoric_acids_and_phosphine),
which burns to the bone and cannot be easily extinguished. In the past,
the Israeli military has been known for using Gaza as a laboratory for
[weapons
experiments](https://pulitzercenter.org/stories/cruel-experiments-israels-arms-industry)
and the same is true of the current [round of
fighting](https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2023/11/17/israels-weapons-industry-is-the-gaza-war-its-latest-test-lab#:~:text=Weapons_tested_in_each_war,laboratory_for_its_arms_industry).

Israel's "war" against Gaza did not, of course, start on October 7th. In
2006, after Gazans elected Hamas to govern them, Israel imposed a siege
on the Strip. As lawyer Dov Weisglass, then an aide to the prime
minister, said at the time, he wanted to keep Gazans [just below
starvation
level](https://electronicintifada.net/content/israels-starvation-diet-gaza/11810)
--- not enough to kill them, but not enough to fill them either. The
present siege has turned Gaza into what's been called the largest
open-air prison on earth, a virtual concentration camp. [A U.N.
commentator](https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v27/n21/sara-roy/a-dubai-on-the-mediterranean)
[described
this](https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v27/n21/sara-roy/a-dubai-on-the-mediterranean)
as "possibly the most rigorous form of international sanctions imposed
in modern times." Such conditions helped produce the October attack.

Occupying the West Bank since 1967, Israel has distinctly contravened
international law. [Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gciv-1949/article-49)
stipulates that "the Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts
of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies." It also
prohibits "individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as
deportations of protected persons from occupied territory." Israel,
however, has settled about 700,000 Israeli Jews in the West Bank. Once
upon a time, there was indeed room for a separate Palestinian state. [No
more](https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/israel-middle-east/articles/sorry-there-is-no-two-state-solution).

**Arabs to the Gas Chambers**

When I visited the West Bank city of Hebron in the 1980s, I saw graffiti
on walls that proclaimed: "ARABS TO THE GAS CHAMBERS." Back then, the
renowned Israeli public intellectual [Yeshayahu
Leibowitz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yeshayahu_Leibowitz#:~:text=Leibowitz_was_an_Orthodox_Jew,or_the_world_to_come.)
warned that Israel was turning its soldiers into Judeonazis. Recent
YouTube videos of soldiers [mocking their
victims](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QRptiehg_Jo) bear out his
prophecy. Fascism is now pervasive in Israel. There are courageous
exceptions like journalists Amira Hass and Gideon Levy who write for the
newspaper *Haaretz* and the group [Combatants for
Peace](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/10/world/middleeast/israelis-palestinians-peace-activists.html).
But [all too
many](https://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/2024-01-24/ty-article/.premium/dont-ask-israelis-right-now-about-palestinian-casualties-in-gaza/0000018d-3770-d32b-adcf-f77227570000)
Israelis have supported their country's assault on Gaza, or even wanted
something worse. I wish I could have told my classmates that, should
they care about Israel, it's their responsibility to speak out now.

The genocide in Gaza has been enabled, of course, by President Biden,
who [continues to
send](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2024/04/04/world-central-kitchen-us-weapons-israel/)
billions of dollars' worth of weaponry, including [devastating
2,000-pound
bombs](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2024/03/29/us-weapons-israel-gaza-war/),
to Israel. Without those arms, the government of Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu couldn't be acting as it is. While it purports to be searching
for and killing Hamas perpetrators of the October 7th atrocities, it's
actually gone to war against the entire population of Gaza. Israeli
historian [Ilan Pappe](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwx1KhYvTg0)
[sees
it](https://www.democracynow.org/2023/10/31/ilan_pappe_israel_invades_gaza)
as "a massive operation of killing, of ethnic cleansing of
depopulation."

When Jews were being slaughtered by the Nazis, the world turned away.
Now, the world has awakened to Israel's crimes. Many American Jews, like
those in [A Jewish Voice for
Peace](https://www.jewishvoiceforpeace.org/) (whose demonstrations I've
attended) are indeed speaking out.

It's often asked how a people who suffered so much could cause such
suffering. In fact, almost all the survivors of the Holocaust are dead.
Obviously, none of the perpetrators of the genocide in Gaza and the
ethnic cleansing of the West Bank were in European concentration camps.
In a 1979 interview, renowned Israeli dissident, Hebrew University
chemistry professor Israel Shahak pointed out that no Holocaust survivor
had ever been a member of the Israeli government. Israel frequently uses
the Holocaust to justify its actions in the Palestinian territories.
This is a sacrilege, while one of history's great crimes is being
committed, and this member of the class of 1958 knows it.

Copyright 2024 Ellen Cantarow

*FollowÂ TomDispatchÂ onÂ [Twitter](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)Â and
join us onÂ [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch). Check out
the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopianÂ novel,Â *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*Â (the
final one in his Splinterlands series),Â Beverly Gologorsky's
novelÂ *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,Â and
Tom Engelhardt'sÂ *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy'sÂ *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S. Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower'sÂ *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Ellen Cantarow](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/ellencantarow/) {#ellen-cantarow .unnumbered}

**Ellen Cantarow** has written about Israel's crimes against the
Palestinian people since 1979 for publications that include
*TomDispatch*, *The Village Voice*, *Mother Jones*, and *Grand Street*.

Thanks to TomDispatch where this article originally appeared, without
the title-image.
