# Living on the Wrong World

![](wrong-world.png){class="a"}

### A Planetary Cease Fire Is Desperately Needed

## By [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

On this planet of ours, it almost doesn't matter who's right and who's
wrong when it comes to our wars.

Actually, let me correct that thought slightly: it certainly does
matter, but what matters so much more is that we humans simply can't
stop fighting them. That is (or at least should be) a stunning and
deeply saddening reality. What obvious lessons we seem congenitally
incapable of learning! In the previous century, after all, there were
two truly global wars, [World War
I](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I_casualties) and [World War
II](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_II_casualties), that were
estimated to have left significantly more than 100 million military
personnel and civilians dead, while decimating parts of the planet. The
second of those conflicts ended with the obliteration of the Japanese
cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on August 6th and 9th, 1945, with the
loss of [possibly 200,000
dead](https://thebulletin.org/2020/08/counting-the-dead-at-hiroshima-and-nagasaki/),
and the arrival in our world of a shattering new weapon, the atomic
bomb. After so many centuries of endless warfare, it finally brought
humanity to the edge of future annihilation.

[]{#anchor}And since those fateful August days so long ago, ever more
nations --- with the addition of North Korea [early in this
century](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_Korea_and_weapons_of_mass_destruction),
the number has risen to [nine](https://www.icanw.org/nuclear_arsenals)
--- have acquired nuclear weapons, while the nations that had them only
continue to "improve" and expand their arsenals. My own country, in
fact, is planning to spend something like [\$1.5
trillion](https://armscontrolcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/U.S.-Nuclear-Weapons-Modernization-Costs-Constraints-Fact-Sheet-v-May-2023.pdf)**
**(yes, trillion!) "modernizing" its already vast arsenal of nukes
deliverable from the land, the sea, or the air, and undoubtedly, in the
years to come, from
[space](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/21/world/europe/us-russia-nuclear-weapon-space.html).
Russia is doing the same and the Chinese are
[hustling](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/19/us/politics/china-nuclear-weapons-russia-arms-treaties.html)
to "catch up" in their ability to take down this planet in a big-time
fashion.

It is --- or at least should be --- incredible to think that today, 78
years after the first test atomic bomb was exploded in New Mexico, even
a relatively modest nuclear war between two countries like India and
Pakistan (as opposed to powers like the United States and Russia with
monster nuclear arsenals) could induce a [global nuclear
winter](https://www.rutgers.edu/news/nuclear-war-would-cause-global-famine-and-kill-billions-rutgers-led-study-finds)
that would be likely to starve to death most of humanity. Worse yet, at
this point, that's undoubtedly not even the worst nuclear scenario
imaginable.

**The Most Remarkable Accomplishment**

Not so very many years ago, in the period after the Cold War officially
ended in 1991 with the collapse of the Soviet Union, I would have found
it strange to be writing a piece about nuclear weapons. I mean, yes,
they were still obviously around in Russia, and in the U.S. But after
the Cuban missile crisis of 1962, those two powers had at least started
signing nuclear pacts, including the [START
agreement](https://www.cfr.org/timeline/us-russia-nuclear-arms-control)
in 1991 to reduce the American and Soviet nuclear arsenals
significantly. And that seemed so hopeful then.

Given who we are, I've always found it somewhat miraculous that, since
those atomic bombs were dropped on two Japanese cities, even as nuclear
weapons spread and grew ever more powerful, another never was used
(unless you count the above-ground nuclear tests of the 1950s that [did
indeed harm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daigo_FukuryÅ«_Maru) small
numbers of human beings). Now, however, the great powers on the planet
are once again in a global nuclear arms race; key arms treaties have
been left in the dust of history; rumors are
[rife](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/21/world/europe/us-russia-nuclear-weapon-space.html)
about such weaponry spreading into space; and two nuclear powers ---
Russia and Israel --- are at war at this very moment (even if not with
each other). The Russian leadership has indeed [threatened to
use](https://www.cnn.com/2023/07/31/europe/medvedev-russia-nuclear-weapons-intl-hnk/index.html)
what are now called "tactical" nuclear weapons in its conflict with
Ukraine, though most of them are significantly more powerful than the
bombs that took out Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Only recently, in fact,
Russian President Vladimir Putin similarly
[threatened](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/29/world/europe/putin-speech-ukraine-nuclear-conflict.html)
to use nuclear weaponry against European countries and the possible
"destruction of civilization."

And yes, a mildly antinuclear movie, a biopic of Robert Oppenheimer, the
man who first developed such weaponry, did come out in this country and
was a [massive
hit](https://variety.com/2023/film/news/oppenheimer-billion-dollar-box-office-christopher-nolan-1235735537/)
(right up there with a nuclear movie of another sort, *Barbie*). In a
sense, someday, if there are any of us left to look back on this past
we're now living through, the greatest "achievement" of humanity might
be viewed as our ever more stunning ability to nuke ourselves and
everything else in sight, the works, the whole shebang. Honestly, that
might be the most remarkable accomplishment of our species, if, of
course, we don't use them again.

Oh, wait, I almost forgot! In our strange brilliance, we humans came up
with not one but two ways to utterly devastate humanity and the planet
we live on. While the first, atomic weaponry, remains an ongoing threat
of instantaneous destruction and horror, the second, a slow-motion
version of ultimate destruction, the literal broiling of this planet
over decades rather than minutes or hours, was launched [almost two
centuries
ago](https://www.carbonbrief.org/scientists-clarify-starting-point-for-human-caused-climate-change/).
It was then that we humans began burning fossil fuels --- coal, oil, and
later natural gas --- to power our industrialization and then our world.
Today, the heating of this planet continues to accelerate day by day,
month by month, year by year, decade by decade. [Heat
records](https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2024/01/2023-was-earths-hottest-year-on-record/)
of a surprising sort are now regularly being set locally and globally,
while
[storms](https://www.edf.org/climate/how-climate-change-makes-hurricanes-more-destructive)
are becoming more devastating,
[droughts](https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2023/05/climate-change-and-droughts-whats-the-connection/)
ever more "mega," and [forest
fires](https://www.npr.org/2023/08/22/1195154996/some-of-canadas-wildfires-likely-made-worse-by-human-driven-climate-change)
fiercer, longer-lived, and more destructive.

And remind me, what have we learned from such a world? Well, the United
States certainly learned that it needed a military beyond compare and
began pouring what would, in the end, be untold trillions of dollars
into it. (As of 2023, our yearly "defense" spending would add up to
[more than](https://www.pgpf.org/chart-archive/0053_defense-comparison)
that of the next 10 countries combined.) Between the end of World War II
and this moment, my country would also fight wars in Korea, Vietnam,
Laos, Cambodia, Grenada, Panama, Afghanistan, Iraq (twice), and on a
smaller (or do I mean larger?) scale its so-called war on terror
stretching from Pakistan across South Asia to the Middle East (where
only lately the Biden administration has been launching [multiple air
strikes](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/04/world/middleeast/us-strikes-yemen-syria-iraq.html)
in Iraq, Syria, and Yemen), and [deep into
Africa](https://tomdispatch.com/the-pentagon-proclaims-failure-in-its-war-on-terror-in-africa/).
Today, in the wake of all that and having assumedly learned something
from more than a century of war-making, death, and destruction (and
since the end of World War II, not a significant victory anywhere on the
planet), my country has --- yep, you guessed it! --- been
[upping](https://tomdispatch.com/the-military-industrial-complex-is-the-winner-not-you/)
its "defense" budget in a big-time fashion, heading for the
trillion-dollar mark annually.

[Buy the Book](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)

It all makes perfect sense, right?

Meanwhile, having discovered that nukes were capable of obliterating
life as we knew it on Planet Earth, we also came to realize that, by
mining for, drilling for, producing, and then burning fossil fuels ---
coal, oil, and natural gas --- in a distinctly unprecedented fashion, we
were, in fact, engaging in a war not *on*, but *of *terror against
this planet and every living thing, us included. The casualties from
climate change (and it is indeed changing this planet in an all too
disastrous fashion) are growing more numerous, as are the
[refugees](https://tomdispatch.com/nowhere-to-run/) from places that are
already becoming too uncomfortably hot to handle. And yet, with that now
common knowledge and the last 10 months --- [month by sweltering
month](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/2023-broke-temperature-records-will-2024-be-even-more-extreme-180983572/)**
---** of record heat globally, the [hottest
months](https://time.com/6692678/january-2024-hottest-record-global-warming/),
one after another, in human history, a leading candidate for president
of the United States is running on a platform of, as he puts it,
"[drill, drill,
drill](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/trump-says-wont-dictator-elected-day-one-rcna128267),"
ensuring that, should he win, the country that's already the [largest
producer](https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/how-us-oil-and-gas-industry-works)
of oil and natural gas on Planet Earth will be leading us all ever more
directly into hell in a proverbial handbasket.

**A Planetary War of Terror**

Mind you, given that, in some fashion, we're all involved in what can
only be thought of as a war of terror aimed at this planet, it's not
just the Trumpists who are all too ready to ignore the reality of what
we're actually doing in the twenty-first century. After all, with the
planet on edge and war itself an [all-too-obvious
contributor](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/jan/09/emissions-gaza-israel-hamas-war-climate-change)
to global warming, Russia, Ukraine, Hamas, and Israel are all now
engaged in conflicts without any obvious end in sight that won't just
ensure the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of people but help heat
the Earth to the boiling point. And let me add that my own president,
Joe Biden, has put significant energy into feeding the Gazan war
(including hundreds of millions of dollars of [arms
shipments](https://apnews.com/article/israel-arms-transfer-congressional-oversight-biden-4de7597913abe75429f9ef48ace9bd88)
to Israel), no matter that doing so might [help
turn](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2024/feb/25/michigan-gretchen-whitmer-biden-israel-gaza-war)
our part of the planet over to President Drill, Drill, Drill!

And lest I sell humanity short by focusing too much on my own country,
let's not forget the [devastating internal
conflicts](https://www.crisisgroup.org/global/10-conflicts-watch-2024)
in lands ranging from Pakistan to Sudan to Ethiopia, where yet more of
us are being slaughtered every day. And who knows where war will break
out next? [Venezuela and
Guyana](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2023_GuyanaâVenezuela_crisis)?
North and South Korea (after all, the leader of North Korea only
recently [threatened the
South](https://apnews.com/article/north-korea-kim-nuclear-missile-icbm-4b5cd2492261ce94dab0f5df1187caec)
with an atomic fate)? Or perhaps the [South China
Sea](https://tomdispatch.com/the-south-china-seas-resource-wars/) or
Taiwan? The Biden administration, for instance, only recently [deployed
five](https://responsiblestatecraft.org/us-aircraft-carrier-pacific/) of
this country's 11 aircraft carriers to the Pacific in a clear challenge
to China, just in case major wars in Europe and the Middle East weren't
enough for us. No one knows, but given our history, one thing seems
painfully certain --- war will undoubtedly break out again and again and
again.

And of course, war can now erupt in new ways, not just the old-fashioned
ones. After all, though it's never thought of in this fashion, the
United States is indeed at war right now. And no, I'm not thinking about
the vast quantities of weaponry that we're delivering to Israel (or [not
at the
moment](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/biden-pushes-republicans-ukraine-israel-aid-bill-trump-opposes-2024-02-14/)
delivering to Ukraine). I'm thinking instead about the fact that my
country produced [record
levels](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/how-u-s-oil-production-reached-an-all-time-high-in-2023)
of oil in 2023 and has become the [world's largest
supplier](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2024/02/03/climate/us-lng-natural-gas-leader.html)
of natural gas (and, mind you, that's with a president who has [taken
crucial
steps](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/01/27/climate/biden-climate-campaign.html)
to whittle down our use of such fuels).

And yes, significant moves are being made in Europe and elsewhere
(though not in major fossil-fuel producer Russia) to repower humanity in
a fashion that will indeed cut fossil-fuel use in a major way, but it's
simply not enough. China, for instance, is [moving
faster](https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/china-dominates-renewable-energy-coal-power-forecasts-russell-2024-01-11/)
than any other country when it comes to installing renewable energy and
so changing its energy landscape. Unfortunately, it still uses [more
coal](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/03/business/energy-environment/china-coal-natural-gas.html)
and continues to build [far
more](https://www.npr.org/2023/03/02/1160441919/china-is-building-six-times-more-new-coal-plants-than-other-countries-report-fin)
new coal power plants than all the other countries on this planet
combined. And consider it anything but strange that the major private
fossil-fuel companies are [still
making](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/02/02/business/oil-gas-companies-profits.html)
absolute fortunes producing products that might as well be slow-motion
versions of atomic weaponry and, unbelievably enough, some of them are
still expanding their search for more of the same.

So, both apocalyptic war and war on the planet itself are now, sadly
enough, ever more deeply woven into the human constellation. Meanwhile,
it seems all too obvious that we can't stop fighting older-style wars
either, killing staggering numbers of people, destroying lands, and
devastating parts of this world and those living on it.

Isn't it strange that, after all these millennia, we humans just keep on
keeping on, that we can't seem to truly face, no less truly deal with,
who and what we are and what we repeatedly do to ourselves, not to speak
of the rest of this planet? The logic of what should be done and how we
should live with one another seems all too obvious in a world that today
finds itself entering an ever more hellish state. It's time not just for
a "cease fire" in Gaza, but for the declaration of some kind of
planetary cease fire.

But can we truly imagine such a thing?Â  Who knows?

Copyright 2024 Tom Engelhardt

*FollowÂ TomDispatchÂ onÂ *[*Twitter*](https://twitter.com/TomDispatch)*Â and
join us onÂ *[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/tomdispatch)*.
Check out the newest Dispatch Books, John Feffer's new
dystopianÂ novel,Â *[Songlands](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1642594644/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*Â (the
final one in his Splinterlands series),Â Beverly Gologorsky's
novelÂ *[Every Body Has a
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469077/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,Â and
Tom Engelhardt'sÂ *[A Nation Unmade by
War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
as well as Alfred McCoy'sÂ *[In the Shadows of the American Century: The
Rise and Decline of U.S.
](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)[Global
Power](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467732/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*,
John Dower'sÂ *[The Violent American Century: War and Terror Since World
War
II](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608467236/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20),
*and Ann Jones's* [They Were Soldiers: How the Wounded Return from
America's Wars: The Untold
Story](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608463710/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).

#### [Tom Engelhardt](https://tomdispatch.com/authors/tomeditor/)

Tom Engelhardt created and runs the website
[*TomDispatch.com*](https://www.tomdispatch.com/). He is also a
co-founder of the [American Empire
Project](http://www.americanempireproject.com/) and the author of a
highly praised history of American triumphalism in the Cold War, [*The
End of Victory
Culture*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/155849586X/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20).Â 
A fellow of the [Type Media Center](https://typemediacenter.org/), his
sixth book is [*A Nation Unmade by
War*](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1608469018/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20)*.*
