# The Fuming Salamander

![](salamander-1.jpg){class="a"}

A salamander, besides being an interesting amphibious creature, in
Spanish – at least in Argentine Spanish – is a squat, cast-iron,
wood-burning stove used for heating, called a *salamandra*. Not much
more to say about this primitive stove...now, so let's start with
the creature. What I learned about salamanders was that it is an
amphibian of the order urodela which was often in olden times
credited with fantastic and sometimes occult qualities such as an
affinity with elemental fire, as in the allegorical descriptions of
animals in medieval bestiaries.

\*\*\*

Now back to the stove. When we moved to the western sierras of
Argentina, far from the confines of Buenos Aires, I converted a
*galpón,* a kind of large shed mostly used for tools and storage,
into an office about 50 meters from the main house. “Converted” is
perhaps an exaggeration, for all I really did was paint it,
disinfect it, install ceiling insulation and an air conditioning
unit. A salamander was already there, not pretty perhaps, but so
what, I was there to work and be reasonably warm in winter and
reasonably cool in summer. By the way, in case you're confused
already, Argentina is not Mexico and it does get cold in winter; not
what you who live in the northern hemisphere call cold, but one does
need heating in winter. Air conditioning is not necessary here at
1,000 meters altitude, but in my *galpón* with its tin roof and
ill-fitting windows inviting in the cold, it certainly is.

So when our first winter came I threw some newspaper and kindling
wood into the salamander/salamandera and waited for it to live up to
its reputation. It didn't, kept going out, leaked smoke and left
ashes that had to be cleaned out. In short, my opinion was that it
*no sirve para nada.* Primitive stuff like this may enchant the
natives, but this is the modern world. So I had a gas heater
installed – despite gas being frightfully expensive – and an
electric one – despite electricity being frightfully expensive.

And so the years flew by, not as comfortable as I would have liked
to have been, but tolerably so.

One day a week ago, an friend who worked in construction, Nino, was
at home to advise on enhanced heating for the main house, where we
already have a fireplace, a gas heater and an electric one. There
are new salmandras (what I’ll call them from now on) on the market
now, much more efficient than the old ones (according to the
publicity) and considerably more attractive*.* I asked him about the
advisability of installing one in our large living-dining room. He
advised against it for various reasons, including the price , about
\$1,500, then said that the old ones are much better, but both are a
lot of work cleaning out every day. I said: but I have an old one in
my galpón-office *que* *no sirve para nada.* What? he said, let's
have a look. So we walked over to the galpón where he gazed at the
salamandra like an old friend. What’s the problem? Lots of smoke?
Goes out all the time?

Sí.

Nino went outside and looked up at the iron pipe leading from the
salamander up through the roof where a metal cap rested on its head.
When’s the last time you cleaned that pipe? he asked me. Uhh...
*nunca,* I replied*.* He laughed*:* Gotta clean it, hombre. That
pipe probably has all kinds of junk in it not letting it breathe:
smoke out, air in.

At that moment I remembered the dream I'd had the night before. You
know, how sometimes you wake up and don't remember a dream you had
until later.

\*\*\*

The dream: I wake up sweating, wondering why it's so hot in winter.
Then I see a bright red light at the foot of the bed. When I'm able
to focus (no specs needed), here's what I see:

![](salamander-2.jpg){class="a"}  

Who..what...are you? I stammer.

Who...what...do I look like?

Fire. (Strangely enough, I felt no fear yet, only surprise.)

I...am... Sofía Salamandra!

Oh yeah?

Yeah, and if you don't know who...or what...I am, I suggest you
listen carefully. He, I mean she (“salamandra” is feminine in
Spanish) puts on a glove – fire proof, I suppose, snaps her fingers
and a charred-at-the-edges paper appears. She reads:

*Salamanders may actively defend themselves once they are grasped by
a predator. Besides various antipredator postures, S. salamandra
adults are able to exude toxic skin secretions such as the
neurotoxic alkaloid Samandarin. This alkaloid causes strong muscle
and hypertension combined with hyperventilation in all vertebrates.
The poison glands of the fire salamander are concentrated in certain
areas of the body, especially around the head and the dorsal skin
surface. The colored portions of the animal's skin usually coincide
with these glands. Compounds in the skin secretions may be effective
against bacterial and fungal infections of the epidermis; some are
potentially dangerous to human life.* That's from Wikipedia.

That, understandably, makes me nervous. I say, Do you mind if I open
a window? It's so hot in here.

Of course I mind, she crackles, it's freezing here. Now just shut
up.

Okay, but I'm not a predator for God's sake.

And do not take the name of the Lord in vain.

Sorry.

She seems to grow, almost touching the bed. Hey, be careful, you'll
set the whole house on fire.

Too bad – but she diminishes a bit.

You have been treating me badly, don Frank (the honorific “don”
being sarcastic). To me that is predation.

But how? I ask, I never saw you before.

Oh yes you did. Years ago you invoked me in your pot-bellied
homonymous stove without sufficient air and with wet wood. You
struck a match, *one of my fingers*, to a piece of newspaper and
threw it in, and when someone does that I *must* react as best I
can. I suffered greatly, choked, gasped for air on my own sweat,
what you call smoke, until I finally died.

But..but, I say in my defense, you're not dead, you're here. And you
go out all the time.

Of course I'm here, you fool! When I go out after having consumed
healthy dry wood and am not asphyxiated by fools I go to sleep until
I am invoked anew. Otherwise I die out, and *you* are the guilty
predator.

But if you *died* out, I insist, only getting myself in deeper, how
come you're here?

I must reincarnate then, which is a lengthy and unpleasant process,
especially when it's for the benefit of idiots like you.

Oh, I say with as much humility as I can muster under the
circumstances, I'm so sorry. I didn't know.

Ignorance is no excuse under the laws of nature.

I open my mouth, but close it again. What can I say to that? After
all, I'm no expert on the laws of nature.

Suddenly – Oh, the horror! – Sofía Salamandra transforms herself
into her real, or other, self

![](salamander-1.jpg){class="a"}  

and starts to crawl towards me. Stop! I cry. What can I do to make
it up to you?

The amphibian stops its forward motion and transforms back to its
fire-form.

Are you truly penitent? she asks.

Yes, yes, what can I do.

First of all, she says – mixing some blue into her color –, clean
out the exhaust pipe from above and the stove from below, then use
dry kindling and have some respect. Do you know why I’m giving you a
second chance? I shook my head. Once you wrote a wonderful
children’s story in which my brother rusty was treated with respect
[^1]. There will be no third chance. I'll be waiting in the
nature-world.

And poof, she was gone.

\*\*\*

Did you hear me, Frank, Nino said, you gotta clean it out. We came
back into the galpón where Nino re-inspected the salamandra. (We'll
call it that from now on.) And you need a piece of mica to put here.
He pointed at an oval-shaped window in its little door.

The next morning I called the lightest odd-jobs guy I knew to go up
on the tin roof and attack the pipe-cleaning job. I worried that a
heavier one might fall through the roof.

Sure, no problem, Mariano said. When's the last time you cleaned it?
When I told him *nunca* he said: *Mierda*, that's probably before I
was born.

He climbed up a ladder onto the roof and tip-toed to the head of the
pipe with a broom-stick in his hand. I couldn't bear to look, so I
went to the house to watch the Mets game on Directv, hoping they'd
end their losing streak. I figured it'd take a while to clean out
that pipe anyway.

A half-hour later I heard Mariano calling me. I went back to the
office-galpón. He opened the door of the salamandra, which was now
full of empty wasp nests. That's what was clogging the pipe, he
said. They leave in the winter, but they'll be back.  They think
this is a comfy home. You'll need mica for the window.

Do you know where I can get some? I asked him.

Hmmm, maybe Ortíz in Villa Dolores. He's the only one who'd have
weird stuff like that.

Mica: “The **mica** group of sheet silicate (phyllosilicate)
minerals, includes several closely related materials having nearly
perfect basal cleavage...” I found in Wikipedia.

I went to Ortíz in Villa Dolores, about 20 kms away, the largest
town in the area. He scratched his head.  Nah, don't make'm anymore.
I asked him where I might find it and he said, Maybe
Gonzalez...maybe.  So I drove across town to Gonzalez, who didn't
have it either. He said I could try a place called La Pampina on the
road between Villa Dolores and San Javier. It's kinda hard to find,
he added, just after that so-called motel, *Eros.* Ever been there?
he smirked.

By then I was feeling frustrated, but I was anxious not to receive
any more nightly visits from Sofía Salamandra, so I drove to *Eros,*
the only per-hour motel in the area. *Buenas tardes, señor*, the
corpulent madam said. All alone and early I see. No matter, we can
arrange early company for you. 24 hour service provided and being
lonely is not healthy.

Actually, I only need information at the moment (thus letting her
think there might be business in the future). I'm looking for La
Pampina.

La Pampina? Ah yes, go north about a league and turn right on a dirt
road and you'll come to it sooner or later, can't miss it, it's the
only thing on that road, never been there myself. Ask for don
Robindo, he's a good client of mine. Tell him la Mariposa sent you.

I found the dirt road, turned right and drove about three kms till I
came to a complex of large sheds and a small one with a crooked sign
reading *oficina* nailed to it. It was empty. I walked around until
I saw three men in coveralls standing before the largest shed
smoking and talking with gestures. I got out of my car, approached
and addressed the oldest one, a guy about sixty with a potbelly and
pens in his shirt pocket. He looked like the boss. I didn't consider
an introduction from a whorehouse madam to be a diplomatic opening,
so, after politely greeting him, I said I was looking for mica. For
what purpose, señor, he asked. For a salamandra. He looked
surprised. Only one? he said. When I nodded they all laughed. I
didn't see the joke, but I grinned sheepishly.

You see, don Robindo said (his named was stitched on his shirt
pocket), we make industrial mica here. Come, I'll show you.

I followed him into the shed which was as large as a warehouse and
was filled with piles of what I learned was mica in various stages
of the production process. He went into a detailed description of
their work, which I won't go into here, although it was interesting.

Maybe we can find what you need here, he said, pointing to a pile of
small mica pieces. He rummaged through the pile and came up with
several oddly-shaped pieces. These aren't thin enough to see
through, he said, but I assume you only want to keep the smoke out –
or in.  He gave me the pieces, without charge, and having noticed my
accent, asked: Where are you from, señor? Where would you guess, don
Robindo? Which is my usual reply to that question; it's an
ice-breaker, although I didn't really need one then.

*Alemania*, he said, giving the most common reply.  I told him to
guess again and he went through most of the countries of the world
before finally hitting on *Los Estados Unidos*. (There aren't many
of us in Argentina.)

*Bueno, muy bueno*, he said and clapped me on the shoulder.

I thanked him profusely and drove home, where I somehow fitted the
largest mica piece inside the salamandra's window, put in dry wood
and some pine-cones as a homecoming gift for Sofía Salamandra and
lighted it with one of her fingers.

It worked perfectly. As the waves of heat surrounded me it felt like
a warm embrace from Sofía Salamandra, who, however, I was confident
of never meeting again “in the flesh”, so to speak.

[^1]: The children’s story Sofía referred to is this: [The Nature
Spirits](fts-nature-spirits.html).
But it’s fiction, whereas this is a True Tale...almost.
