![](steiner-jews-palestine.png){class="a"}

# The Yearning of the Jews for Palestine

### Magazin für Literatur 1897, 66. Jg., Nr. 38 

## By Rudolf Steiner

#### GA 31

Many intelligent people will find it superfluous to speak about the
strange gathering that took place in Basel a few days ago under the name
\"Zionist Congress.\" The fact that a number of European Jews came
together to promote the idea of ​establishing a new Palestinian empire
and encouraging the Jews to emigrate to this new \"promised land\" was
seen to be the insane idea of ​​a morbidly excited fantasy. In this
judgment, they calmed down. They did not discuss the matter anymore. I
believe, however, that these wise men have lagged ten years behind in
their judgments. And ten years is a small eternity in our time when
events are flowing so fast. Ten years ago, with some justification, one
could think that a Jew was half mad who had the idea of ​​moving his
people to Palestine. Today one may only consider him hypersensitive and
vain; but in another ten years things can be very different.

However, in the case of Herzl and Nordau, the present leaders of the
Zionist movement, I think it is more about vanity than a sensitivity to
a perceived increase in antisemitism. The commonplace phrases that Herzl
put forward in his booklet \"The Jewish State\" (M. Breitenstein\'s
bookstore, Leipzig and Vienna, 1896) and the verbal fluff with which the
sensationalist Nordau in Basel delighted his listeners are certainly not
from the deepest depths of troubled souls. But they come from
intelligent minds who know what has the strongest effect on Jews who
have a sensitive heart and a sophisticated sense of self-respect. These
latter members of the Jewish people will, in my opinion, become
followers of Herzl and Nordau. And the number of these members is
certainly not small.

What good is it to emphasize so often that the Jews who feel this way
are in serious error? They turn their eyes away from the great progress
that the Jews have made in recent decades, the emancipation of the Jews,
and only see that they are still excluded from certain places, and
certain rights are still abridged; and, moreover, they hear that they
are being insulted by the antisemites in the most desperate way. They do
so because their hurt feelings cloud their minds. They are unable to see
the powerlessness of antisemitism; they only see its drive and its
outrageous excesses. They doubt whoever tells them: look at how futile
the machinations of the hate of the Jews is, and how all their endeavors
end in disgrace.

They listen only to those who say to them like Theodor Herzl:** \"In the
populations, anti**s**emitism is growing daily, hourly, and must
continue to grow, because the causes persist and cannot be remedied.
\... Our welfare seems to contain something provocative, because for
many centuries the world has been accustomed to seeing in us the most
despicable of the poor. At the same time one does not realize, out of
ignorance or narrow-mindedness, that our welfare weakens us as Jews and
extinguishes our peculiarities. Only the pressure presses us back to the
old tribe, only the hatred of our surroundings makes us strangers again.
So we are and will remain, whether we like it or not, a historical group
of recognizable togetherness. We are one people; the enemy makes us
**such** without our will, as has always been the case in history\".**

And those with whom such words resonate most powerfully today were only
a short time ago passionately prepared to merge their ethnicity into
that of the West. It is not real antisemitism that is the cause of this
Jewish over-sensitivity, but the false image of an over-excited fantasy
of the anti-Jewish movement. Anyone who has anything to do with Jews
knows how deep-seated among the best of its people is the tendency to
form such a false image. Mistrust of the non-Jew has thoroughly seized
their souls. They also suspect people in whom they can perceive no trace
of conscious antis emitism, they suspect an unconscious, instinctive,
secret hatred of the Jews at the bottom of the soul. I count it among
the most beautiful fruits, which can drive human inclination, if every
trace of suspicion between a Jew and a non-Jew is extinguished. I would
call this a victory over human nature to exclude such inclinations.

There may come a time when the sphere of Jewish personalities becomes so
irritated that any understanding with non-Jews becomes impossible. What
counts in the so-called Jewish question is sensible arguments and plans,
not the tearing of intimate threads between Jew and non-Jew, or the rise
of emotional tendencies, or a thousand unspeakable things. It would be
best if there were as little talk as possible in this matter. Only the
mutual actions of individuals should be valued. It does not matter if
someone is Jewish or Germanic: if I find him nice, I like him; if he is
disgusting, I avoid him. This is so simple that it is almost silly when
you say it. But how foolish you have to be to say the opposite!

I think the antisemites are harmless people. The best of them are like
children. They want to have something to blame for the ill they suffer.
When a child drops a plate, he looks for somebody or something that has
bumped it to blame for the accident. He does not look for the cause, the
fault, in himself. That is what the antisemites do. Many people feel
bad. They look for something to blame. The circumstances have brought it
about that many currently see this something in Judaism.

Much worse than the antisemites are the heartless leaders of the
Europe-weary Jews, Herzl and Nordau. They turn an unpleasant
childishness into a world-history stream; they turn harmless banter into
terrible cannon fire. They are seducers, tempters of their people. They
sacrifice the understanding that all reasonable people should desire,
for their own vanity, which thirsts for programs, because where deeds
are lacking, the right program is established.

However harmless antisemitism is in itself, it becomes dangerous when
the Jews see it in the light Herzl and Nordau put it in.

And they understand the language of the tempters, these masters: **\"One
will pray in the temples for the success of the work. But in the
churches too! It is the solution of an old pressure under which all
suffered. But first of all light must be shed on minds. The idea must
fly out to the last miserable nests where our people live. They will
wake up from their dull brooding. For in all our lives comes a new
content. Everyone only needs to think about it themselves, and the train
will be a mighty one. And what glory awaits those fighters for the
cause! That is why I believe that a generation of Jews will grow out of
the earth. The Maccabees will rise again.\" **So writes Theodor Herzl in
his \"The Jewish State\".

I fear there will come a time when the Jews will no longer believe what
we non-Jews tell them about antisemitism, in favor of parroting their
Jewish seducers. And like so many beguiled people, they will translate
the empty phrases of these deceivers into the language of their hearts.
The seduced will suffer; but the seducers will triumph over the success
that their vanity has achieved.

In Basil the question has been basically decided: what should be done to
make the solution of the Jewish question as impossible as it possibly
could be? Whether Herzl and Nordau really believe that their Palestinian
Empire can be established, I am not in a position to decide. I
hypothesize, in honor of their intelligence, that they do not believe in
it. If I am right in this assumption, then one must blame these leaders
for placing more obstacles between Jews and non-Jews than the
anti-Semitic agitators.

The Zionist movement is an enemy of Judaism. The Jews would do best to
look closely at the people who paint ghosts for them.

Editor's note: This article was written in 1897, long before Hitler and
National Socialism came to power in Germany and committed the holocaust.
So Rudolf Steiner was wrong about the "harmlessness" of antisemitism.
When one considers, however, what is happening today in the Jewish state
of Israel and Gaza, it becomes possible to think that he may have been
right about the temptation of Zionism. FTS
